Official Journal EN
of the European Union L series
2023/2772 22.12.2023
COMMISSION DELEGATED REGULATION (EU) 2023/2772
of 31 July 2023
supplementing Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards
sustainability reporting standards
(Text with EEA relevance)
THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION,
Having regard to Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on the annual
financial statements, consolidated financial statements and related reports of certain types of undertakings, amending
Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 78/660/EEC
and 83/349/EEC(1), and in particular Article 29b(1), first subparagraph, thereof,
Whereas:
(1) Directive 2013/34/EU, as amended by Directive (EU) 2022/2464 of the European Parliament and of the Council(2),
requires large undertakings, small and medium-sized undertakings with securities admitted to trading on the EU
regulated markets, as well as parent undertakings of large groups, to include in a dedicated section of their
management report or consolidated management report the information necessary to understand the undertaking’s
impacts on sustainability matters, and the information necessary to understand how sustainability matters affect the
undertaking’s development, performance and position. Undertakings are to prepare this information in accordance
with sustainability reporting standards starting from the financial year indicated in Article 5(2) of Directive
(EU) 2022/2464 for each category of undertakings.
(2) The Commission is required to adopt by 30 June 2023 a first set of standards specifying the information that
undertakings are to report in accordance with Article 19a(1) and (2), and Article 29a(1) and (2) of that Directive,
including at least the information that financial market participants need in order to comply with the disclosure
obligations of Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 of the European Parliament and of the Council(3).
(3) The Commission has taken into account the technical advice provided by the EFRAG. EFRAG’s independent technical
advice meets the criteria set out in Article 49(3b), first, second and third subparagraphs, of Directive 2013/34/EU. To
ensure proportionality and to facilitate the correct application of the standards by undertakings, the Commission has
introduced modifications to EFRAG’s technical advice as regards the materiality approach, the phasing-in of certain
requirements, the conversion of certain requirements into voluntary datapoints, the introduction of flexibilities in a
number of disclosure requirements, the introduction of technical modifications to ensure coherence with the
Union’s legal framework and a high degree of interoperability with global standard-setting initiatives, as well as
editorial modifications.
(4) These sustainability reporting standards meet the requirements set out in Article 29b of Directive 2013/34/EU.
(5) Common sustainability reporting standards should therefore be adopted.
(6) In accordance with Article 29b(1), fourth subparagraph, of Directive 2013/34/EU this Regulation should not enter
into force earlier than 4 months after its adoption by the Commission. Considering that Article 5(2) of Directive
(EU) 2022/2464 requires certain categories of undertakings to apply these sustainability reporting standards for
financial years starting on or after 1 January 2024, this Regulation should enter into force on the third day
following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union.
(1) OJ L 182, 29.6.2013, p. 19.
(2) Directive (EU) 2022/2464 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2022 amending Regulation (EU)
No 537/2014, Directive 2004/109/EC, Directive 2006/43/EC and Directive 2013/34/EU, as regards corporate sustainability reporting
(OJ L 322, 16.12.2022, p. 15).
(3) Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 November 2019 on sustainability-related disclosures
in the financial services sector (OJ L 317, 9.12.2019, p. 1).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 1/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(7) In accordance with Article 49(3b), fourth subparagraph, of Directive 2013/34/EU, the Commission has consulted
jointly the Member State Expert Group on Sustainable Finance, referred to in Article 24 of Regulation
(EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council(4), and the Accounting Regulatory Committee,
referred to in Article 6 of Regulation (EC) No 1606/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council(5). In
accordance with Article 49(3b), fifth subparagraph, of Directive 2013/34/EU, the Commission has requested the
opinion of the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA), the European Banking Authority (EBA) and the
European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA), in particular with regard to the consistency of
this Regulation with Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 and the delegated acts adopted pursuant to that Regulation. In
accordance with Article 49(3b), sixth subparagraph, of Directive 2013/34/EU, the Commission has also consulted
the European Environment Agency, the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights, the European Central
Bank, the Committee of European Auditing Oversight Bodies and the Platform on Sustainable Finance established
pursuant to Article 20 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852,
HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
Article 1
Subject matter
The sustainability reporting standards that undertakings are to use for carrying out their sustainability reporting in
accordance with Articles 19a and 29a of Directive 2013/34/EU following the timetable set out in Article 5(2) of Directive
(EU) 2022/2464 are set out in Annexes I and II of this Regulation.
Article 2
Entry into force and application
This Regulation shall enter into force on the third day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European
Union.
It shall apply from 1 January 2024for financial years beginning on or after 1 January 2024.
This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States.
Done at Brussels, 31 July 2023.
For the Commission
The President
Ursula VON DER LEYEN
(4) Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2020 on the establishment of a framework to
facilitate sustainable investment, and amending Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 (OJ L 198, 22.6.2020, p. 13).
(5) Regulation (EC) No 1606/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 July 2002 on the application of international
accounting standards (OJ L 243, 11.9.2002, p 1).
2/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
ANNEX I
European sustainability reporting standards (ESRS)
ESRS 1 General requirements
ESRS 2 General disclosures
ESRS E1 Climate change
ESRS E2 Pollution
ESRS E3 Water and marine resources
ESRS E4 Biodiversity and ecosystems
ESRS E5 Resource use and circular economy
ESRS S1 Own workforce
ESRS S2 Workers in the value chain
ESRS S3 Affected communities
ESRS S4 Consumers and end-users
ESRS G1 Business conduct
ESRS 1
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Objective
1. Categories of ESRS Standards, reporting areas and drafting conventions
1.1 Categories of ESRS Standards
1.2 Reporting areas and minimum content disclosure requirements on policies, actions, targets and metrics
1.3 Drafting conventions
2. Qualitative characteristics of information
3. Double materiality as the basis for sustainability disclosures
3.1 Stakeholders and their relevance to the materiality assessment process
3.2 Material matters and materiality of information
3.3 Double materiality
3.4 Impact materiality
3.5 Financial materiality
3.6 Material impacts or risks arising from actions to address sustainability matters
3.7 Level of disaggregation
4. Due diligence
5. Value chain
5.1 Reporting undertaking and value chain
5.2 Estimation using sector averages and proxies
6. Time horizons
6.1 Reporting period
6.2 Linking past, present and future
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 3/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
6.3 Reporting progress against the base year
6.4 Definition of short-, medium- and long-term for reporting purposes
7 Preparation and presentation of sustainability information
7.1 Presenting comparative information
7.2 Sources of estimation and outcome uncertainty
7.3 Updating disclosures about events after the end of the reporting period
7.4 Changes in preparation or presentation of sustainability information
7.5 Reporting errors in prior periods
7.6 Consolidated reporting and subsidiary exemption
7.7 Classified and sensitive information, and information on intellectual property, know-how or results of
innovation
7.8 Reporting on opportunities
8. Structure of sustainability statement
8.1 General presentation requirement
8.2 Content and structure of the sustainability statement
9. Linkages with other parts of corporate reporting and connected information
9.1 Incorporation by reference
9.2 Connected information and connectivity with financial statements
10. Transitional provisions
10.1 Transitional provision related to entity-specific disclosures
10.2 Transitional provision related to chapter 5 Value chain
10.3 Transitional provision related to section 7.1 Presenting comparative information
10.4 Transitional provision: List of Disclosure Requirements that are phased-in
Appendix A: Application Requirements
– Entity-specific disclosures
– Double materiality
– Estimation using sector averages and proxies
– Content and structure of the sustainability statement
Appendix B: Qualitative characteristics of information
Appendix C: List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements
Appendix D: Structure of ESRS sustainability statement
Appendix E: Flowchart for determining disclosures to be included
Appendix F: Example of structure of ESRS sustainability statement
Appendix G: Example of incorporation by reference
4/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Objective
1. The objective of European Sustainability Reporting Standards (ESRS) is to specify the sustainability information that
an undertaking shall disclose in accordance with Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the
Council(1), as amended by Directive (EU) 2022/2464 of the European Parliament and of the Council.(2)Reporting
in accordance with ESRS does not exempt undertakings from other obligations laid down in Union law.
2. Specifically, ESRS specify the information that an undertaking shall disclose about its material impacts, risks and
opportunities in relation to environmental, social, and governance sustainability matters. ESRS do not require
undertakings to disclose any information on environmental, social and governance topics covered by ESRS when the
undertaking has assessed the topic in question as non-material (See Appendix E of this Standard “Flowchart for
determining disclosures to be included”).The information disclosed in accordance with ESRS enables users of the
sustainability statement to understand the undertaking’s material impacts on people and environment and the
material effects of sustainability matters on the undertaking’s development, performance and position.
3. The objective of this Standard (ESRS 1) is to provide an understanding of the architecture of ESRS, the drafting
conventions and fundamental concepts used, and the general requirements for preparing and presenting
sustainability information in accordance with Directive 2013/34/EU, as amended by Directive (EU) 2022/2464.
1. Categories of ESRS Standards, reporting areas and drafting conventions
1.1 Categories of ESRS standards
4. There are three categories of ESRS:
(a) cross-cutting standards;
(b) topical standards (Environmental, Social and Governance standards); and
(c) sector-specific standards.
Cross-cutting standards and topical standards are sector-agnostic, meaning that they apply to all undertakings
regardless of which sector or sectors the undertaking operates in.
5. The cross-cutting standards ESRS 1 General requirements and ESRS 2 General disclosures apply to the sustainability
matters covered by topical standards and sector-specific standards.
6. This standard (ESRS 1) describes the architecture of ESRS standards, explains drafting conventions and fundamental
concepts, and sets out general requirements for preparing and presenting sustainability-related information.
7. ESRS 2 establishes Disclosure Requirements on the information that the undertaking shall provide at a general level
across all material sustainability matters on the reporting areas governance, strategy, impact, risk and opportunity
management, and metrics and targets.
8. Topical ESRS cover a sustainability topic and are structured into topics and sub-topics, and where necessary sub-sub-
topics. The table in Application Requirement 16 (AR 16) to this standard provides an overview of the sustainability
topics, sub-topics and sub-sub-topics (collectively ‘sustainability matters’) covered by topical ESRS.
(1) Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on the annual financial statements,
consolidated financial statements and related reports of certain types of undertakings, amending Directive 2006/43/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 78/660/EEC and 83/349/EEC (OJ L 182, 29.6.2013, p. 19).
(2) Directive (EU) 2022/2464 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2022 amending Regulation (EU)
No 537/2014, Directive 2004/109/EC, Directive 2006/43/EC and Directive 2013/34/EU, as regards corporate sustainability reporting
(OJ L 322, 16.12.2022, p. 15).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 5/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
9. Topical ESRS can include specific requirements that complement the general level Disclosure Requirements of ESRS
2. ESRS 2 Appendix C Disclosure/Application Requirements in topical ESRS that are applicable jointly with ESRS 2 General
Disclosures provides a list of the additional requirements in topical ESRS that the undertaking shall apply in
conjunction with the general level disclosure requirements of ESRS 2.
10. Sector-specific standards are applicable to all undertakings within a sector. They address impacts, risks and
opportunities that are likely to be material for all undertakings in a specific sector and that are not covered, or not
sufficiently covered, by topical standards. Sector-specific standards are multi-topical and cover the topics that are
most relevant to the sector in question. Sector-specific standards achieve a high degree of comparability.
11. In addition to the disclosure requirements laid down in the three categories of ESRS, when an undertaking concludes
that an impact, risk or opportunity is not covered or not covered with sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is
material due to its specific facts and circumstances, it shall provide additional entity-specific disclosures to enable
users to understand the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities. Application
requirements AR 1 to AR 5 provide further guidance regarding entity-specific disclosures.
1.2 Reporting areas and minimum content disclosure requirements on policies, actions, targets and metrics
12. The Disclosure Requirements in ESRS 2, in topical ESRS and in sector-specific ESRS are structured into the following
reporting areas:
(a) Governance (GOV): the governance processes, controls and procedures used to monitor, manage and oversee
impacts, risks and opportunities (see ESRS 2, chapter 2 Governance);
(b) Strategy (SBM): how the undertaking’s strategy and business model interact with its material impacts, risks and
opportunities, including how the undertaking addresses those impacts, risks and opportunities (see ESRS 2,
chapter 3 Strategy);
(c) Impact, risk and opportunity management (IRO): the process(es) by which the undertaking:
i. identifies impacts, risks and opportunities and assesses their materiality (see IRO-1 in section 4.1 of ESRS 2),
ii. manages material sustainability matters through policies and actions (see section 4.2 of ESRS 2).
(d) Metrics and targets (MT): the undertaking’s performance, including targets it has set and progress towards
meeting them (see ESRS 2, chapter 5 Metrics and targets).
13. ESRS 2 includes:
(a) in section 4.2 Minimum Disclosure Requirements regarding policies (MDR-P) and actions (MDR-A);
(b) in section 5 Minimum Disclosure Requirements regarding metrics (MDR-M) and targets (MDR-T).
The undertaking shall apply the minimum disclosure requirements regarding policies, actions, metrics and targets
together with the corresponding Disclosure Requirements in topical and sector-specific ESRS.
1.3 Drafting conventions
14. In all ESRS:
(a) the term “impacts” refers to positive and negative sustainability-related impacts that are connected with the
undertaking’s business, as identified through an impact materiality assessment (see section 3.4 Impact
materiality). It refers both to actual impacts and to potential future impacts.
6/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) The term “risks and opportunities” refers to the undertaking’s sustainability-related financial risks and
opportunities, including those deriving from dependencies on natural, human and social resources, as identified
through a financial materiality assessment (see section 3.5).
Collectively, these are referred to as “impacts, risks and opportunities” (IROs). They reflect the double materiality
perspective of ESRS described in section 3.
15. Throughout ESRS, the terms that are defined in the glossary of definitions (Annex II) are put in bold italic, except
when a defined term is used more than once in the same paragraph.
16. ESRS structure the information to be disclosed under Disclosure Requirements. Each Disclosure Requirement
consists of one or more distinct datapoints. The term “datapoint” can also refer to a narrative sub-element of a
Disclosure Requirement.
17. In addition to Disclosure Requirements most ESRS also contain Application Requirements. Application
Requirements support the application of Disclosure Requirements and have the same authority as other parts of an
ESRS.
18. ESRS use the following terms to distinguish between different degrees of obligation on the undertaking to disclose
information:
(a) “shall disclose” – indicates that the provision is prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement or datapoint;
(b) “may disclose” – indicates voluntary disclosure to encourage good practice.
In addition, ESRS use the term “shall consider” when referring to issues, resources or methodologies that the
undertaking is expected to take into account or to use in the preparation of a given disclosure if applicable.
2. Qualitative characteristics of information
19. When preparing its sustainability statement, the undertaking shall apply:
(a) the fundamental qualitative characteristics of information, i.e. relevance and faithful representation; and
(b) the enhancing qualitative characteristics of information, i.e. comparability, verifiability and understandability.
20. These qualitative characteristics of information are defined and described in Appendix B of this Standard.
3. Double materiality as the basis for sustainability disclosures
21. The undertaking shall report on sustainability matters based on the double materiality principle as defined and
explained in this chapter.
3.1 Stakeholders and their relevance to the materiality assessment process
22. Stakeholders are those who can affect or be affected by the undertaking. There are two main groups of stakeholders:
(a) affected stakeholders: individuals or groups whose interests are affected or could be affected – positively or
negatively – by the undertaking’s activities and its direct and indirect business relationships across its value
chain; and
(b) users of sustainability statements: primary users of general-purpose financial reporting (existing and potential
investors, lenders and other creditors, including asset managers, credit institutions, insurance undertakings), and
other users of sustainability statements, including the undertaking’s business partners, trade unions and social
partners, civil society and non-governmental organisations, governments, analysts and academics.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 7/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
23. Some, but not all, stakeholders may belong to both groups referred to in paragraph 22.
24. Engagement with affected stakeholders is central to the undertaking’s on-going due diligence process (see chapter 4
Due diligence) and sustainability materiality assessment. This includes its processes to identify and assess actual and
potential negative impacts, which then inform the assessment process to identify the material impacts for the
purposes of sustainability reporting (see section 3.4 of this Standard).
3.2 Material matters and materiality of information
25. Performing a materiality assessment (see sections 3.4 Impact materiality and 3.5 Financial materiality) is necessary for
the undertaking to identify the material impacts, risks and opportunities to be reported.
26. Materiality assessment is the starting point for sustainability reporting under ESRS. IRO-1 in section 4.1 of ESRS 2,
includes general disclosure requirements about the undertaking’s process to identify impacts, risks and opportunities
and assess their materiality. SBM-3 of ESRS 2 provides general disclosure requirements on the material impacts, risks
and opportunities resulting from the undertaking’s materiality assessment.
27. The Application Requirements in Appendix A of this Standard include a list of sustainability matters covered in
topical ESRS, categorised by topics, sub-topics and sub-sub-topics, to support the materiality assessment. Appendix
E Flowchart for determining disclosures to be included of this Standard provides an illustration of the materiality
assessment described in this section.
28. A sustainability matter is “material” when it meets the criteria defined for impact materiality (see section 3.4 of this
Standard) or financial materiality (see section 3.5 of this Standard), or both.
29. Irrespective of the outcome of its materiality assessment, the undertaking shall always disclose the information
required by: ESRS 2 General Disclosures (i.e. all the Disclosure Requirements and data points specified in ESRS 2) and
the Disclosure Requirements (including their datapoints) in topical ESRS related to the Disclosure Requirement
IRO-1 Description of the process to identify and assess material impacts, risks and opportunities, as listed in ESRS 2
Appendix C Disclosure/Application Requirements in topical ESRS that are applicable jointly with ESRS 2 General Disclosures.
30. When the undertaking concludes that a sustainability matter is material as a result of its materiality assessment, on
which ESRS 2 IRO-1, IRO-2 and SBM-3 set disclosure requirements, it shall:
(a) disclose information according to the Disclosure Requirements (including Application Requirements) related to
that specific sustainability matter in the corresponding topical and sector-specific ESRS; and
(b) disclose additional entity-specific disclosures (see paragraph 11 and AR 1 to AR 5 of this Standard) when the
material sustainability matter is not covered by an ESRS or is covered with insufficient granularity.
31. The applicable information prescribed within a Disclosure Requirement, including its datapoints, or an entity-specific
disclosure, shall be disclosed when the undertaking assesses, as part of its assessment of material information, that
the information is relevant from one or more of the following perspectives:
(a) the significance of the information in relation to the matter it purports to depict or explain; or
(b) the capacity of such information to meet the users’ decision-making needs, including the needs of primary users
of general-purpose financial reporting described in paragraph 48 and/or the needs of users whose principal
interest is in information about the undertaking’s impacts.
8/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
32. If the undertaking concludes that climate change is not material and therefore omits all disclosure requirements in
ESRS E1 Climate change, it shall disclose a detailed explanation of the conclusions of its materiality assessment with
regard to climate change (see ESRS 2 IRO-2 Disclosure Requirements in ESRS covered by the undertaking’s sustainability
statement), including a forward-looking analysis of the conditions that could lead the undertaking to conclude that
climate change is material in the future. If the undertaking concludes that a topic other than climate change is not
material and therefore it omits all the Disclosure Requirements in the corresponding topical ESRS, it may briefly
explain the conclusions of its materiality assessment for that topic.
33. When disclosing information on policies, actions and targets in relation to a sustainability matter that has been
assessed to be material, the undertaking shall include the information prescribed by all the Disclosure Requirements
and datapoints in the topical and sector-specific ESRS related to that matter and in the corresponding Minimum
Disclosure Requirement on policies, actions, and targets required under ESRS 2. If the undertaking cannot disclose
the information prescribed by either the Disclosure Requirements and datapoints in the topical or sector-specific
ESRS, or the Minimum Disclosure Requirements in ESRS 2 on policies, actions and targets, because it has not
adopted the respective policies, implemented the respective actions or set the respective targets, it shall disclose this
to be the case and it may report a timeframe in which it aims to have these in place.
34. When disclosing information on metrics for a material sustainability matter according to the Metrics and Targets
section of the relevant topical ESRS, the undertaking:
(a) shall include the information prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement if it assesses such information to be
material; and
(b) may omit the information prescribed by a datapoint of a Disclosure Requirement if it assesses such information
to be not material and concludes that such information is not needed to meet the objective of the Disclosure
Requirement.
35. If the undertaking omits the information prescribed by a datapoint that derives from other EU legislation listed in
Appendix B of ESRS 2, it shall explicitly state that the information in question is “not material”.
36. The undertaking shall establish how it applies criteria, including appropriate thresholds, to determine:
(a) the information it discloses on metrics for a material sustainability matter according to the Metrics and Targets
section of the relevant topical ESRS, in accordance with paragraph 34; and
(b) the information to be disclosed as entity-specific disclosures.
3.3 Double materiality
37. Double materiality has two dimensions, namely: impact materiality and financial materiality. Unless specified
otherwise, the terms “material” and “materiality” are used throughout ESRS to refer to double materiality.
38. Impact materiality and financial materiality assessments are inter-related and the interdependencies between these
two dimensions shall be considered. In general, the starting point is the assessment of impacts, although there may
also be material risks and opportunities that are not related to the undertaking’s impacts. A sustainability impact
may be financially material from inception or become financially material, when it could reasonably be expected to
affect the undertaking’s financial position, financial performance, cash flows, its access to finance or cost of capital
over the short-, medium- or long-term. Impacts are captured by the impact materiality perspective irrespective of
whether or not they are financially material.
39. In identifying and assessing the impacts, risks and opportunities in the undertaking’s value chain to determine their
materiality, the undertaking shall focus on areas where impacts, risks and opportunities are deemed likely to arise,
based on the nature of the activities, business relationships, geographies or other factors concerned.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 9/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
40. The undertaking shall consider how it is affected by its dependencies on the availability of natural, human and social
resources at appropriate prices and quality, irrespective of its potential impacts on those resources.
41. An undertaking’s principal impacts, risks and opportunities are understood to be the same as the material impacts,
risks and opportunities identified under the double materiality principle and therefore reported on in its
sustainability statement.
42. The undertaking shall apply the criteria set under sections 3.4 and 3.5 in this Standard, using appropriate
quantitative and/or qualitative thresholds. Appropriate thresholds are necessary to determine which impacts, risks
and opportunities are identified and addressed by the undertaking as material and to determine which
sustainability matters are material for reporting purposes. Some existing standards and frameworks use the term
"most significant impacts” when referring to the threshold used to identify the impacts that are described in ESRS as
"material impacts."
3.4 Impact materiality
43. A sustainability matter is material from an impact perspective when it pertains to the undertaking’s material actual
or potential, positive or negative impacts on people or the environment over the short-, medium- or long-term.
Impacts include those connected with the undertaking’s own operations and upstream and downstream value chain,
including through its products and services, as well as through its business relationships. Business relationships
include those in the undertaking’s upstream and downstream value chain and are not limited to direct contractual
relationships.
44. In this context, impacts on people or the environment include impacts in relation to environmental, social and
governance matters.
45. The materiality assessment of a negative impact is informed by the due diligence process defined in the international
instruments of the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights and the OECD Guidelines for Multinational
Enterprises. For actual negative impacts, materiality is based on the severity of the impact, while for potential negative
impacts it is based on the severity and likelihood of the impact. Severity is based on the following factors:
(a) the scale;
(b) scope; and
(c) irremediable character of the impact.
In the case of a potential negative human rights impact, the severity of the impact takes precedence over its
likelihood.
46. For positive impacts, materiality is based on:
(a) the scale and scope of the impact for actual impacts; and
(b) the scale, scope and likelihood of the impact for potential impacts.
3.5 Financial materiality
47. The scope of financial materiality for sustainability reporting is an expansion of the scope of materiality used in the
process of determining which information should be included in the undertaking’s financial statements.
48. The financial materiality assessment corresponds to the identification of information that is considered material for
primary users of general-purpose financial reports in making decisions relating to providing resources to the entity.
In particular, information is considered material for primary users of general-purpose financial reports if omitting,
misstating or obscuring that information could reasonably be expected to influence decisions that they make on the
basis of the undertaking’s sustainability statement.
10/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
49. A sustainability matter is material from a financial perspective if it triggers or could reasonably be expected to trigger
material financial effects on the undertaking. This is the case when a sustainability matter generates risks or
opportunities that have a material influence, or could reasonably be expected to have a material influence, on the
undertaking’s development, financial position, financial performance, cash flows, access to finance or cost of capital
over the short-, medium- or long-term. Risks and opportunities may derive from past events or future events. The
financial materiality of a sustainability matter is not constrained to matters that are within the control of the
undertaking but includes information on material risks and opportunities attributable to business relationships
beyond the scope of consolidation used in the preparation of financial statements.
50. Dependencies on natural, human and social resources can be sources of financial risks or opportunities.
Dependencies may trigger effects in two possible ways:
(a) they may influence the undertaking’s ability to continue to use or obtain the resources needed in its business
processes, as well as the quality and pricing of those resources; and
(b) they may affect the undertaking’s ability to rely on relationships needed in its business processes on acceptable
terms.
51. The materiality of risks and opportunities is assessed based on a combination of the likelihood of occurrence and
the potential magnitude of the financial effects.
3.6 Material impacts or risks arising from actions to address sustainability matters
52. The undertaking’s materiality assessment may lead to the identification of situations in which its actions to address
certain impacts or risks, or to benefit from certain opportunities in relation to a sustainability matter, might have
material negative impacts or cause material risks in relation to one or more other sustainability matters. For
example:
(a) an action plan to decarbonise production that involves abandoning certain products might have material
negative impacts on the undertaking’s own workforce and result in material risks due to redundancy payments;
or
(b) an action plan of an automotive supplier to focus on the supply of e-vehicles might lead to stranded assets for the
production of supply parts for conventional vehicles.
53. In such situations, the undertaking shall:
(a) disclose the existence of material negative impacts or material risks together with the actions that generate them,
with a cross-reference to the topic to which the impacts or risks relate; and
(b) provide a description of how the material negative impacts or material risks are addressed under the topic to
which they relate.
3.7 Level of disaggregation
54. When needed for a proper understanding of its material impacts, risks and opportunities, the undertaking shall
disaggregate the reported information:
(a) by country, when there are significant variations of material impacts, risks and opportunities across countries
and when presenting the information at a higher level of aggregation would obscure material information about
impacts, risks or opportunities; or
(b) by significant site or by significant asset, when material impacts, risks and opportunities are highly dependent on
a specific location or asset.
55. When defining the appropriate level of disaggregation for reporting, the undertaking shall consider the
disaggregation adopted in its materiality assessment. Depending on the undertaking’s specific facts and
circumstances, a disaggregation by subsidiary may be necessary.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 11/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
56. Where data from different levels, or multiple locations within a level, is aggregated, the undertaking shall ensure that
this aggregation does not obscure the specificity and context necessary to interpret the information. The undertaking
shall not aggregate material items that differ in nature.
57. When the undertaking presents information disaggregated by sectors, it shall adopt the ESRS sector classification to
be specified in a delegated act adopted by the Commission pursuant to article 29b(1) third subparagraph, point (ii),
of Directive 2013/34/EU. When a topical or sector-specific ESRS requires that a specific level of disaggregation is
adopted in preparing a specific item of information, the requirement in the topical or sector-specific ESRS shall
prevail.
4. Due diligence
58. The outcome of the undertaking’s sustainability due diligence process (referred to as “due diligence” in the
international instruments mentioned below) informs the undertaking’s assessment of its material impacts, risks and
opportunities. ESRS do not impose any conduct requirements in relation to due diligence; nor do they extend or
modify the role of the administrative, management or supervisory bodies of the undertaking with regard to the
conduct of due diligence.
59. Due diligence is the process by which undertakings identify, prevent, mitigate and account for how they address the
actual and potential negative impacts on the environment and people connected with their business. These include
negative impacts connected with the undertaking’s own operations and its upstream and downstream value chain,
including through its products or services, as well as through its business relationships. Due diligence is an on-going
practice that responds to and may trigger changes in the undertaking’s strategy, business model, activities, business
relationships, operating, sourcing and selling contexts. This process is described in the international instruments of
the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights and the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises.
60. These international instruments identify a number of steps in the due diligence process, including the identification
and assessment of negative impacts connected with the undertaking’s own operations and its upstream and
downstream value chain, including through its products or services, as well as through its business relationships.
Where the undertaking cannot address all impacts at once, the due diligence process allows for action to be
prioritised based on the severity and likelihood of the impacts. It is this aspect of the due diligence process that
informs the assessment of material impacts (see section 3.4 of this Standard). The identification of material impacts
also supports the identification of material sustainability risks and opportunities, which are often a product of such
impacts.
61. The core elements of due diligence are reflected directly in Disclosure Requirements set out in ESRS 2 and in the
topical ESRS, as illustrated below:
(a) embedding due diligence in governance, strategy and business model(3). This is addressed under:
i. ESRS 2 GOV-2: Information provided to and sustainability matters addressed by the undertaking’s administrative,
management and supervisory bodies;
ii. ESRS 2 GOV-3: Integration of sustainability-related performance in incentive schemes; and
iii. ESRS 2 SBM-3: Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and business model.
(3) UN Guiding Principle 16 and its commentary; UN Interpretive Guide, Questions 21 and 25 as well as OECD Guidelines Chapter II on
General Policies (paragraph A.10), and chapter IV on Human Rights (paragraph 4; and paragraph 44 of the Commentary); and OECD
Due Diligence Guidance, Section II (1.1 and 1.2) and Annex, Questions 14 and 15.
12/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) engaging with affected stakeholders(4). This is addressed under:
i. ESRS 2 GOV-2;
ii. ESRS 2 SBM-2: Interests and views of stakeholders;
iii. ESRS 2 IRO-1;
iv. ESRS 2 MDR-P; and
v. Topical ESRS: reflecting the different stages and purposes of stakeholder engagement throughout the due
diligence process.
(c) identifying and assessing negative impacts on people and the environment(5). This is addressed under:
i. ESRS 2 IRO-1 (including Application Requirements related to specific sustainability matters in the relevant
ESRS); and
ii. ESRS 2 SBM-3;
(d) taking action to address negative impacts on people and the environment(6). This is addressed under:
i. ESRS 2 MDR-A; and
ii. Topical ESRS: reflecting the range of actions, including transition plans, through which impacts are
addressed.
(e) tracking the effectiveness of these efforts(7). This is addressed under:
i. ESRS 2 MDR-M;
ii. ESRS 2 MDR-T; and
iii. Topical ESRS: regarding metrics and targets.
5. Value chain
5.1 Reporting undertaking and value chain
62. The sustainability statement shall be for the same reporting undertaking as the financial statements. For example, if
the reporting undertaking is a parent company required to prepare consolidated financial statements, the
sustainability statement will be for the group. This requirement does not apply where the reporting undertaking is
not required to draw-up financial statements or where the reporting undertaking is preparing consolidated
sustainability reporting pursuant to Article 48i of Directive 2013/34/EU.
63. The information about the reporting undertaking provided in the sustainability statement shall be extended to
include information on the material impacts, risks and opportunities connected with the undertaking through its
direct and indirect business relationships in the upstream and/or downstream value chain (“value chain
information”). In extending the information about the reporting undertaking, the undertaking shall include material
impacts, risks and opportunities connected with its upstream and downstream value chain:
(a) following the outcome of its due diligence process and of its materiality assessment; and
(4) UN Guiding Principle 18 and its Commentary, UN Guiding Principle 20, Commentary to UN Guiding Principles 21 and 29, and UN
Guiding Principle 31(h) and its Commentary; and the UN Interpretive Guide, Questions 30, 33, 42 and 76 as well as OECD
Guidelines Chapter II on General Policies (paragraph A.14 and paragraph 25 of the Commentary); and OECD Due Diligence
Guidance, Section II (2.1.c, 2.3. 2.4.a, 3.1.b and 3.1.f) and Annex Questions 8- 11.
(5) UN Guiding Principles 17, 18 and 24 and their Commentaries, and the Commentary to UN Guiding Principle 29; and the UN
Interpretive Guide, Questions 9, 12-13, 27-28, 36-42, and 85-89 and OECD Guidelines Chapter II on General Policies (paragraphs
A.10-11 and paragraph 14 of the Commentary), and Chapter IV on Human Rights (paragraphs 1-2 and paragraphs 41-43 of the
Commentary); and OECD Due Diligence Guidance, Section II (2.1- 2.4) and Annex Questions 3-5, and 19-31).
(6) UN Guiding Principles 19, 22 and 23 and their Commentaries; and the UN Interpretive Guide, Questions 11, 32, 46-47, 64-68
and 82-83 and OECD Guidelines Chapter II on General Policies (paragraphs A.12 and paragraphs 18-22 of the Commentary), and
Chapter IV on Human Rights (paragraphs 3 and 42-43 of the Commentary); and OECD Due Diligence Guidance, Section II (3.1-3.2)
and Annex Questions 32-40).
(7) UN Guiding Principles 20 and 31(g) and their Commentaries; and the UN Interpretive Guide, Questions 49-53 and 80 and OECD Due
Diligence Guidance, Section II (4.1 and 5.1) and Annex Questions 41-47.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 13/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) in accordance with any specific requirements related to the value chain in other ESRS.
64. Paragraph 63 does not require information on each and every actor in the value chain, but only the inclusion of
material upstream and downstream value chain information. Different sustainability matters can be material in
relation to different parts of the undertaking’s upstream and downstream value chain. The information shall be
extended to include value chain information only in relation to the parts of the value chain for which the matter is
material.
65. The undertaking shall include material value chain information when this is necessary to:
(a) allow users of sustainability statements to understand the undertaking’s material impacts, risks and
opportunities; and/or
(b) produce a set of information that meets the qualitative characteristics of information (see Appendix B of this
Standard).
66. When determining at which level within its own operations and its upstream and downstream value chain a material
sustainability matter arises, the undertaking shall use its assessment of impacts, risks and opportunities following the
double materiality principle (see chapter 3 of this Standard).
67. When associates or joint ventures, accounted for under the equity method or proportionally consolidated in the
financial statements, are part of the undertaking’s value chain, for example as suppliers, the undertaking shall
include information related to those associates or joint ventures in accordance with paragraph 63 consistent with
the approach adopted for the other business relationships in the value chain. In this case, when determining impact
metrics, the data of the associate or joint venture are not limited to the share of equity held, but shall be taken into
account on the basis of the impacts that are connected with the undertaking’s products and services through its
business relationships.
5.2 Estimation using sector averages and proxies
68. The undertaking’s ability to obtain the necessary upstream and downstream value chain information may vary
depending on various factors, such as the undertaking’s contractual arrangements, the level of control that it
exercises on the operations outside the consolidation scope and its buying power. When the undertaking does not
have the ability to control the activities of its upstream and/or downstream value chain and its business
relationships, obtaining value chain information may be more challenging.
69. There are circumstances where the undertaking cannot collect the information about its upstream and downstream
value chain as required by paragraph 63 after making reasonable efforts to do so. In these circumstances, the
undertaking shall estimate the information to be reported about its upstream and downstream value chain, by using
all reasonable and supportable information, such as sector-average data and other proxies.
70. Obtaining value chain information could also be challenging in the case of SMEs and other upstream and/or
downstream value chain entities that are not in the scope of the sustainability reporting required by Articles 19a
and 29a of Directive 2013/34/EU (see ESRS 2 BP-2 Disclosures in relation to specific circumstances).
71. With reference to policies, actions and targets, the undertaking’s reporting shall include upstream and/or
downstream value chain information to the extent that those policies, actions and targets involve actors in the value
chain. With reference to metrics, in many cases, in particular for environmental matters for which proxies are
available, the undertaking may be able to comply with the reporting requirements without collecting data from the
actors in its upstream and downstream value chain, especially from SMEs, for example, when calculating the
undertaking’s GHG Scope 3 emissions.
14/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
72. The incorporation of estimates made using sector-average data or other proxies shall not result in information that
does not meet the qualitative characteristics of information (see chapter 2 and section 7.2 Sources of estimation and
outcome uncertainty of this Standard).
6. Time horizons
6.1 Reporting period
73. The reporting period for the undertaking’s sustainability statement shall be consistent with that of its financial
statements.
6.2 Linking past, present and future
74. The undertaking shall establish appropriate linkages in its sustainability statement between retrospective and
forward-looking information, when relevant, to foster a clear understanding of how historical information relates to
future-oriented information.
6.3 Reporting progress against the base year
75. A base year is the historical reference date or period for which information is available and against which subsequent
information can be compared over time.
76. The undertaking shall present comparative information in respect of the base year for amounts reported in the
current period when reporting the developments and progress towards a target, unless the relevant Disclosure
Requirement already defines how to report progress. The undertaking may also include historical information about
achieved milestones between the base year and the reporting period when this is relevant information.
6.4 Definition of short-, medium- and long-term for reporting purposes
77. When preparing its sustainability statement, the undertaking shall adopt the following time intervals as of the end
of the reporting period:
(a) for the short-term time horizon: the period adopted by the undertaking as the reporting period in its financial
statements;
(b) for the medium-term time horizon: from the end of the short-term reporting period defined in (a) up to 5 years;
and
(c) for the long-term time horizon: more than 5 years.
78. The undertaking shall use an additional breakdown for the long-term time horizon when impacts or actions are
expected in a period longer than 5 years if necessary to provide relevant information to users of sustainability
statements.
79. If different definitions of medium- or long-term time horizons are required for specific items of disclosure in other
ESRS, the definitions in those ESRS shall prevail.
80. There may be circumstances where the use of the medium- or long-term time horizons defined in paragraph 77
results in non-relevant information, as the undertaking uses a different definition for (i) its processes of identification
and management of material impacts, risks and opportunities or (ii) the definition of its actions and setting targets.
These circumstances may be due to industry-specific characteristics, such as cash flow and business cycles, the
expected duration of capital investments, the time horizons over which the users of sustainability statements
conduct their assessments or the planning horizons typically used in the undertaking’s industry for decision-making.
In these circumstances, the undertaking may adopt a different definition of medium- and/or long- term time horizons
(see ESRS 2 BP–2, paragraph 9).
81. References to “short-term”, “medium-term”, and “long-term” in ESRS refer to the time horizon as determined by the
undertaking according to the provisions in paragraphs 77 to 80.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 15/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
7. Preparation and presentation of sustainability information
82. This chapter provides general requirements to be applied when preparing and presenting sustainability information.
7.1 Presenting comparative information
83. The undertaking shall disclose comparative information in respect of the previous period for all quantitative metrics
and monetary amounts disclosed in the current period. When relevant to an understanding of the current period’s
sustainability statement, the undertaking shall also disclose comparative information for narrative disclosures.
84. When the undertaking reports comparative information that differs from the information reported in the previous
period it shall disclose:
(a) the difference between the figure reported in the previous period and the revised comparative figure; and
(b) the reasons for the revision of the figure.
85. Sometimes, it is impracticable to adjust comparative information for one or more prior periods to achieve
comparability with the current period. For example, data might not have been collected in the prior period(s) in a
way that allows either retrospective application of a new definition of a metric or target, or retrospective restatement
to correct a prior period error, and it may be impracticable to recreate the information (see ESRS 2 BP-2). When it is
impracticable to adjust comparative information for one or more prior periods, the undertaking shall disclose this
fact.
86. When an ESRS requires the undertaking to present more than one comparative period for a metric or datapoint, the
requirements of that ESRS shall prevail.
7.2 Sources of estimation and outcome uncertainty
87. When quantitative metrics and monetary amounts, including upstream and downstream value chain information
(see chapter 5 of this Standard), cannot be measured directly and can only be estimated, measurement uncertainty
may arise.
88. An undertaking shall disclose information to enable users to understand the most significant uncertainties affecting
the quantitative metrics and monetary amounts reported in its sustainability statement.
89. The use of reasonable assumptions and estimates, including scenario or sensitivity analysis, is an essential part of
preparing sustainability-related information and does not undermine the usefulness of that information, provided
that the assumptions and estimates are accurately described and explained. Even a high level of measurement
uncertainty would not necessarily prevent such an assumption or estimate from providing useful information or
meeting the qualitative characteristics of information (see Appendix B of this Standard).
90. Data and assumptions used in preparing the sustainability statement shall be consistent to the extent possible with
the corresponding financial data and assumptions used in the undertaking’s financial statements.
91. Some ESRS require the disclosure of information such as explanations about possible future events that have
uncertain outcomes. In judging whether information about such possible future events is material, the undertaking
shall refer to the criteria in Chapter 3 of this Standard and consider:
(a) the potential financial effects of the events (the possible outcome);
(b) the severity and likelihood of the impacts on people or the environment resulting from the possible events,
taking account of the factors of severity specified in paragraph 45; and
(c) the full range of possible outcomes and the likelihood of the possible outcomes within that range.
16/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
92. When assessing the possible outcomes, the undertaking shall consider all relevant facts and circumstances, including
information about low-probability and high-impact outcomes, which, when aggregated, could become material. For
example, the undertaking might be exposed to several impacts or risks, each of which could cause the same type of
disruption, such as disruptions to the undertaking’s supply chain. Information about an individual source of risk
might not be material if disruption from that source is highly unlikely to occur. However, information about the
aggregate risk of supply chain disruption from all sources might be material (see ESRS 2 BP-2).
7.3 Updating disclosures about events after the end of the reporting period
93. In some cases, the undertaking may receive information after the reporting period but before the management report
is approved for issuance. If such information provides evidence or insights about conditions existing at period end,
the undertaking shall, where appropriate, update estimates and sustainability disclosures, in the light of the new
information.
94. When such information provides evidence or insights about material transactions, other events and conditions that
arise after the end of the reporting period, the undertaking shall, where appropriate, provide narrative information
indicating the existence, nature and potential consequences of these post-year end events.
7.4 Changes in preparation or presentation of sustainability information
95. The definition and calculation of metrics, including metrics used to set targets and monitor progress towards them,
shall be consistent over time. The undertaking shall provide restated comparative figures, unless it is impracticable
to do so (see ESRS 2 BP-2), when it has:
(a) redefined or replaced a metric or target;
(b) identified new information in relation to the estimated figures disclosed in the preceding period and the new
information provides evidence of circumstances that existed in that period.
7.5 Reporting errors in prior periods
96. The undertaking shall correct material prior period errors by restating the comparative amounts for the prior
period(s) disclosed, unless it is impracticable to do so. This requirement does not extend to reporting periods before
the first year of application of ESRS by the undertaking.
97. Prior period errors are omissions from, and misstatements in, the undertaking’s sustainability statement for one or
more prior periods. Such errors arise from a failure to use, or misuse of, reliable information that:
(a) was available when the management report that includes the sustainability statement for those periods was
authorised for issuance; and
(b) could reasonably be expected to have been obtained and considered in the preparation of sustainability
disclosures included in these reports.
98. Such errors include: the effects of mathematical mistakes, mistakes in applying the definitions for metrics or targets,
oversights or misinterpretations of facts, and fraud.
99. Potential errors in the current period discovered in that period are corrected before the management report is
authorised for issuance. However, material errors are sometimes only discovered in a subsequent period.
100. When it is impracticable to determine the effect of an error on all prior periods presented, the undertaking shall
restate the comparative information to correct the error from the earliest date practicable. When correcting
disclosures for a prior period, the undertaking shall not use hindsight either in making assumptions about what the
management’s intentions would have been in a prior period or in estimating the amounts disclosed in a prior
period. This requirement applies to correction of both backward-looking and forward- looking disclosures.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 17/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
101. Corrections of errors are distinguished from changes in estimates. Estimates may need to be revised as additional
information becomes known (see ESRS 2 BP-2).
7.6 Consolidated reporting and subsidiary exemption
102. When the undertaking is reporting at a consolidated level, it shall perform its assessment of material impacts, risks
and opportunities for the entire consolidated group, regardless of its group legal structure. It shall ensure that all
subsidiaries are covered in a way that allows for the unbiased identification of material impacts, risks and
opportunities. Criteria and thresholds for assessing an impact, risk or opportunity as material shall be determined
based on chapter 3 of this Standard.
103. Where the undertaking identifies significant differences between material impacts, risks or opportunities at group
level and material impacts, risks or opportunities of one or more of its subsidiaries, the undertaking shall provide an
adequate description of the impacts, risks and opportunities, as appropriate, of the subsidiary or subsidiaries
concerned.
104. When assessing whether the differences between material impacts, risks or opportunities at group level and material
impacts, risks or opportunities of one or more of its subsidiaries are significant, the undertaking may consider
different circumstances, such as whether the subsidiary or subsidiaries operate in a different sector than the rest of
the group or the circumstances reflected in section 3.7 Level of disaggregation.
7.7 Classified and sensitive information, and information on intellectual property, know-how or results of innovation
105. The undertaking is not required to disclose classified information or sensitive information, even if such information
is considered material.
106. When disclosing information about its strategy, plans and actions, where a specific piece of information
corresponding to intellectual property, know-how or the results of innovation is relevant to meet the objective of a
Disclosure Requirement, the undertaking may nevertheless omit that specific piece of information if it:
(a) is secret in the sense that it is not, as a body or in the precise configuration and assembly of its components,
generally known among or readily accessible to persons within the circles that normally deal with the kind of
information in question;
(b) has commercial value because it is secret; and
(c) has been subject to reasonable steps by the undertaking to keep it secret.
107. If the undertaking omits classified information or sensitive information, or a specific piece of information
corresponding to intellectual property, know-how or the results of innovation because it meets the criteria
established in the previous paragraph, it shall comply with the disclosure requirement in question by disclosing all
other required information.
108. The undertaking shall make every reasonable effort to ensure that beyond the omission of the classified information
or sensitive information, or of the specific piece of information corresponding to intellectual property, know-how or
the results of innovation, the overall relevance of the disclosure in question is not impaired.
7.8 Reporting on opportunities
109. When reporting on opportunities, the disclosure should consist of descriptive information allowing the reader to
understand the opportunity for the undertaking or the entire sector. When reporting on opportunities, the
undertaking shall consider the materiality of the information to be disclosed. In this context, it shall consider,
among other factors:
(a) whether the opportunity is currently being pursued and is incorporated in its general strategy, as opposed to a
general opportunity for the undertaking or the sector; and
18/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) whether the inclusion of quantitative measures of anticipated financial effects is appropriate, taking into
account the number of assumptions that it could require and consequential uncertainty.
8. Structure of the sustainability statement
110. This chapter provides the basis for the presentation of the information about sustainability matters prepared in
compliance with Articles 19a and 29a of Directive 2013/34/EU (i.e., the sustainability statement) within the
undertaking’s management report. Such information is presented in a dedicated section of the management report
identified as the sustainability statement. Appendix F Example of structure of ESRS sustainability statement of this
Standard provides an illustrative example of a sustainability statement structured according to the requirements of
this chapter.
8.1 General presentation requirement
111. Sustainability information shall be presented:
(a) in a way that allows a distinction between information required by disclosures in ESRS and other information
included in the management report; and
(b) under a structure that facilitates access to and understanding of the sustainability statement, in a format that is
both human-readable and machine-readable.
8.2 Content and structure of the sustainability statement
112. Except for the possibility to incorporate information by reference in accordance with section 9.1 Incorporation by
reference of this Standard, the undertaking shall report all the applicable disclosures required by ESRS in accordance
with chapter 1 of this Standard, within a dedicated section of the management report.
113. The undertaking shall include in its sustainability statement the disclosures pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation
(EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and the Council(8)and to the Commission Delegated Regulations that
specify the content and other modalities of those disclosures. The undertaking shall ensure that these disclosures are
separately identifiable within the sustainability statement. The disclosures relating to each of the environmental
objectives defined in the Taxonomy Regulation shall be presented together in a clearly identifiable part of the
environmental section of the sustainability statement. These disclosures are not subject to the provisions of ESRS,
with the exception of this paragraph and the first sentence of paragraph 115 of this standard.
114. When the undertaking includes in its sustainability statement additional disclosures stemming from (i) other
legislation which requires the undertaking to disclose sustainability information, or (ii) generally accepted
sustainability reporting standards and frameworks, including non-mandatory guidance and sector-specific guidance,
published by other standard-setting bodies (such as technical material issued by the International Sustainability
Standards Board or the Global Reporting Initiative), such disclosures shall:
(a) be clearly identified with an appropriate reference to the related legislation, standard or framework (see ESRS 2
BP-2, paragraph 15);
(b) meet the requirements for qualitative characteristics of information specified in chapter 2 and Appendix B of this
standard.
115. The undertaking shall structure its sustainability statement in four parts, in the following order: general
information, environmental information (including disclosures pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852),
social information and governance information. Respecting the provision in section 3.6 Material impacts or risks
arising from actions to address sustainability matters of this Standard, when information provided in one part contains
information to be reported in another part, the undertaking may refer in one part to information presented in
another part, avoiding duplications. The undertaking may apply the detailed structure illustrated in Appendix F of
this Standard.
(8) Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2020 on the establishment of a framework to
facilitate sustainable investment, and amending Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 (OJ L 198, 22.6.2020, p. 13).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 19/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
116. The disclosures required by sector-specific ESRS shall be grouped by reporting area and, where applicable, by
sustainability topic. They shall be presented alongside the disclosures required by ESRS 2 and the corresponding
topical ESRS.
117. Where the undertaking develops material entity-specific disclosures in accordance with paragraph 11 it shall report
those disclosures alongside the most relevant sector-agnostic and sector-specific disclosures.
9. Linkages with other parts of corporate reporting and connected information
118. The undertaking shall provide information that enables users of its sustainability statement to understand the
connections between different pieces of information in the statement, and the connections between the information
in the sustainability statement and other information that the undertaking discloses in other parts of its corporate
reporting.
9.1 Incorporation by reference
119. Provided that the conditions in paragraph 120 are met, information prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement of an
ESRS, including a specific datapoint prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement, may be incorporated in the
sustainability statement by reference to:
(a) another section of the management report;
(b) the financial statements;
(c) the corporate governance statement (if not part of the management report);
(d) the remuneration report required by Directive 2007/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council(9);
(e) the universal registration document, as referred to in Article 9 of Regulation (EU) 2017/1129(10); and
(f) public disclosures under Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Pillar 3
disclosures)(11). If the undertaking incorporates by reference information from Pillar 3 disclosures, it shall
ensure that the information matches the scope of consolidation used for the sustainability statement by
complementing the incorporated information with additional elements as necessary.
120. The undertaking may incorporate information by reference to the documents, or part of the documents, listed in
paragraph 119, provided that the disclosures incorporated by reference:
(a) constitute a separate element of information and are clearly identified in the document concerned as addressing
the relevant Disclosure Requirement, or the relevant specific datapoint prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement;
(b) are published before or at the same time as the management report;
(c) are in the same language as the sustainability statement;
(d) are subject to at least the same level of assurance as the sustainability statement; and
(e) meet the same technical digitalisation requirements as the sustainability statement.
(9) Directive 2007/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 July 2007 on the exercise of certain rights of shareholders
in listed companies (OJ L 184, 14.7.2007, p. 17).
(10) Regulation (EU) 2017/1129 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2017 on the prospectus to be published when
securities are offered to the public or admitted to trading on a regulated market, and repealing Directive 2003/71/EC (OJ L 168,
30.6.2017, p. 12).
(11) Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential requirements for credit
institutions and investment firms and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 (OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 1).
20/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
121. Provided that the conditions established in paragraph 120 are met, information prescribed by a Disclosure
Requirement of an ESRS, including a specific datapoint prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement, may be
incorporated in the sustainability statement by reference to the undertaking’s report prepared according to EU Eco-
Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS) Regulation (EU) No 1221/2009(12). In this case, the undertaking shall ensure
that the information incorporated by reference is produced using the same basis for preparation of ESRS information,
including scope of consolidation and treatment of value chain information.
122. In the preparation of its sustainability statement using incorporation by reference, the undertaking shall consider
the overall cohesiveness of the reported information and ensure that the incorporation by reference does not impair
the readability of the sustainability statement. Appendix G Example of incorporation by reference of this Standard is an
illustrative example of incorporation by reference (See ESRS 2 BP-2).
9.2 Connected information and connectivity with financial statements
123. The undertaking shall describe the relationships between different pieces of information. Doing so could require
connecting narrative information on governance, strategy and risk management to related metrics and targets. For
example, in providing connected information, the undertaking may need to explain the effect or likely effect of its
strategy on its financial statements or financial plans, or explain how its strategy relates to metrics and targets used
to measure progress against performance. Furthermore, the undertaking may need to explain how its use of natural
resources and changes within its supply chain could amplify, change or reduce its material impacts, risks and
opportunities. It may need to link this information to information about current or anticipated financial effects on
its production costs, to its strategic response to mitigate such impacts or risks, and to its related investment in new
assets. The undertaking may also need to link narrative information to the related metrics and targets and to
information in the financial statements. Information that describes connections shall be clear and concise.
124. When the sustainability statement includes monetary amounts or other quantitative data points that exceed a
threshold of materiality and that are presented in the financial statements (direct connectivity between information
disclosed in sustainability statement and information disclosed in financial statements), the undertaking shall include
a reference to the relevant paragraph of its financial statements where the corresponding information can be found.
125. The sustainability statement may include monetary amounts or other quantitative datapoints that exceed a
threshold of materiality and that are either an aggregation of, or a part of, monetary amounts or quantitative data
presented in the undertaking’s financial statements (indirect connectivity between information disclosed in
sustainability statement and information disclosed in financial statements). If this is the case, the undertaking shall
explain how these amounts or datapoints in the sustainability statement relate to the most relevant amounts
presented in the financial statements. This disclosure shall include a reference to the line item and/or to the relevant
paragraphs of its financial statements where the corresponding information can be found. Where appropriate, a
reconciliation may be provided, and it may be presented in a tabular form.
126. In the case of information not covered by paragraphs 124 and 125, the undertaking shall explain, based on a
threshold of materiality, the consistency of significant data, assumptions, and qualitative information included in its
sustainability statement with the corresponding data, assumptions and qualitative information included in the
financial statements. This may occur when the sustainability statement includes:
(a) monetary amounts or other quantitative data linked to monetary amounts or other quantitative data presented in
the financial statements; or
(b) qualitative information linked to qualitative information presented in the financial statements.
(12) Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the voluntary participation
by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS), repealing Regulation (EC) No 761/2001 and
Commission Decisions 2001/681/EC and 2006/193/EC (OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 1).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 21/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
127. Consistency as required by paragraph 126 shall be at the level of a single datapoint and shall include a reference to the
relevant line item or paragraph of notes to the financial statements. When significant data, assumptions and
qualitative information are not consistent, the undertaking shall state that fact and explain the reason.
128. Examples of items for which the explanation in paragraph 126 is required, are:
(a) when the same metric is presented as of the reporting date in financial statements and as a forecast for future
periods in the sustainability statement; and
(b) when macroeconomic or business projections are used to develop metrics in the sustainability statement and
they are also relevant in estimating the recoverable amount of assets, the amount of liabilities or provisions in
financial statements.
129. Topical and sector-specific ESRS may include requirements to include reconciliations or to illustrate consistency of
data and assumptions for specific Disclosure Requirements. In such cases, the requirements in those ESRS shall
prevail.
10 Transitional provisions
10.1 Transitional provision related to entity-specific disclosures
130. The extent to which sustainability matters are covered by ESRS is expected to evolve as further Disclosure
Requirements are developed. Therefore, the need for entity-specific disclosures is likely to decrease over time, in
particular as a result of the future adoption of sector specific standards.
131. When defining its entity-specific disclosures, the undertaking may adopt transitional measures for their preparation
in the first three annual sustainability statements under which it may as a priority:
(a) introduce in its reporting those entity-specific disclosures that it reported in prior periods, if these disclosures
meet or are adapted to meet the qualitative characteristics of information referred to under chapter 2 of this
Standard; and
(b) complement its disclosures prepared on the basis of the topical ESRS with an appropriate set of additional
disclosures to cover sustainability matters that are material for the undertaking in its sector(s), using available
best practice and/or available frameworks or reporting standards, such as IFRS industry-based guidance and GRI
Sector Standards.
10.2 Transitional provision related to chapter 5 Value chain
132. For the first 3 years of the undertaking’s sustainability reporting under the ESRS, in the event that not all the
necessary information regarding its upstream and downstream value chain is available, the undertaking shall explain
the efforts made to obtain the necessary information about its upstream and downstream value chain, the reasons
why not all of the necessary information could be obtained, and its plans to obtain the necessary information in the
future.
133. For the first 3 years of its sustainability reporting under the ESRS, in order to take account of the difficulties that
undertakings may encounter in gathering information from actors throughout their value chain and in order to
limit the burden for SMEs in the value chain:
(a) when disclosing information on policies, actions and targets in accordance with ESRS2 and other ESRS, the
undertaking may limit upstream and downstream value chain information to information available in-house,
such as data already available to the undertaking and publicly available information; and
(b) when disclosing metrics, the undertaking is not required to include upstream and downstream value chain
information, except for datapoints derived from other EU legislation, as listed in ESRS 2 Appendix B.
22/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
134. Paragraphs 132 and 133 apply irrespective of whether or not the relevant actor in the value chain is an SME.
135. Starting from the fourth year of its reporting under the ESRS, the undertaking shall include upstream and/or
downstream value chain information according to paragraph 63. In this context, the information required by ESRS
to be obtained from SME undertakings in the undertaking’s upstream and/or downstream value chain will not
exceed the content of the future ESRS for listed SMEs.
10.3 Transitional provision related to section 7.1 Presenting comparative information
136. To ease the first-time application of this Standard, the undertaking is not required to disclose the comparative
information required by section 7.1 Presenting comparative information in the first year of preparation of the
sustainability statement under the ESRS. For disclosure requirements listed in Appendix C List of phased-in
Disclosure Requirements, this transitional provision applies with reference to the first year of mandatory application of
the phased-in disclosure requirement.
10.4 Transitional provision: List of Disclosure Requirements that are phased-in
137. Appendix C List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements in this Standard sets phase-in provisions for the Disclosure
Requirements or datapoints of Disclosure Requirements in ESRS that may be omitted or that are not applicable in
the first year(s) of preparation of the sustainability statement under the ESRS.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 23/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix A
Application Requirements
This appendix is an integral part of ESRS 1 and has the same authority as the other parts of the Standard.
Entity specific disclosures
AR 1. The entity-specific disclosures shall enable users to understand the undertaking’s impacts, risks and opportunities
in relation to environmental, social or governance matters.
AR 2. When developing entity-specific disclosures, the undertaking shall ensure that:
(a) the disclosures meet the qualitative characteristics of information as set out in chapter 2 Qualitative
characteristics of information; and
(b) its disclosures include, where applicable, all material information related to the reporting areas of governance;
strategy; impact, risk and opportunity management; and metrics and targets (see ESRS 2 chapters 2 to 5).
AR 3. When determining the usefulness of metrics for inclusion in its entity-specific disclosures, the undertaking shall
consider whether:
(a) its chosen performance metrics provide insight into:
i. how effective its practices are in reducing negative outcomes and/or increasing positive outcomes for
people and the environment (for impacts); and/or
ii. the likelihood that its practices result in financial effects on the undertaking (for risks and opportunities);
(b) the measured outcomes are sufficiently reliable, meaning that they do not involve an excessive number of
assumptions and unknowns that would render the metrics too arbitrary to provide a faithful representation;
and
(c) it has provided sufficient contextual information to interpret performance metrics appropriately, and whether
variations in such contextual information may impact the comparability of the metrics over time.
AR 4. When developing its entity-specific disclosures, the undertaking shall carefully consider:
(a) comparability between undertakings, while still ensuring relevance of the information provided, recognising
that comparability may be limited for entity- specific disclosures. The undertaking shall consider whether the
available and relevant frameworks, initiatives, reporting standards and benchmarks (such as technical material
issued by the International Sustainability Standards Board or the Global Reporting Initiative) provide elements
that can support comparability to the maximum extent possible; and
(b) comparability over time: consistency of methodologies and disclosures is a key factor for achieving
comparability over time.
AR 5. Further guidance for developing entity-specific disclosures can be found by considering the information required
under topical ESRS that addresses similar sustainability matters.
Double materiality
Stakeholders and their relevance to the materiality assessment process
AR 6. In addition to the categories of stakeholder listed in paragraph 22, common categories of stakeholders are:
employees and other workers, suppliers, consumers, customers, end- users, local communities and persons in
vulnerable situations, and public authorities, including regulators, supervisors and central banks.
24/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 7. Nature may be considered as a silent stakeholder. In this case, ecological data and data on the conservation of
species may support the undertaking’s materiality assessment.
AR 8. Materiality assessment is informed by dialogue with affected stakeholders. The undertaking may engage with
affected stakeholders or their representatives (such as employees or trade unions), along with users of
sustainability reporting and other experts, to provide inputs or feedback on its conclusions regarding its material
impacts, risks and opportunities.
Assessment of impact materiality
AR 9. In assessing impact materiality and determining the material matters to be reported, the undertaking shall
consider the following three steps:
(a) understanding of the context in relation to its impacts including its activities, business relationships, and
stakeholders;
(b) identification of actual and potential impacts (both negative and positive), including through engaging with
stakeholders and experts. In this step, the undertaking may rely on scientific and analytical research on
impacts on sustainability matters;
(c) assessment of the materiality of its actual and potential impacts and determination of the material matters. In
this step, the undertaking shall adopt thresholds to determine which of the impacts will be covered in its
sustainability statement.
Characteristics of severity
AR 10. The severity is determined by the following factors:
(a) scale: how grave the negative impact is or how beneficial the positive impact is for people or the environment;
(b) scope: how widespread the negative or positive impacts are. In the case of environmental impacts, the scope
may be understood as the extent of environmental damage or a geographical perimeter. In the case of impacts
on people, the scope may be understood as the number of people adversely affected; and
(c) irremediable character: whether and to what extent the negative impacts could be remediated, i.e., restoring the
environment or affected people to their prior state.
AR 11. Any of the three characteristics (scale, scope, and irremediable character) can make a negative impact severe. In the
case of a potential negative human rights impact, the severity of the impact takes precedence over its likelihood.
Impacts connected with the undertaking
AR 12. As an illustration:
(a) if the undertaking uses cobalt in its products that is mined using child labour, the negative impact (i.e., child
labour) is connected with the undertaking’s products through the tiers of business relationships in its
upstream value chain. These relationships include the smelter and minerals trader and the mining enterprise
that uses child labour; and
(b) if the undertaking provides financial loans to an enterprise for business activities that, in breach of agreed
standards, result in the contamination of water and land surrounding the operations, this negative impact is
connected with the undertaking through its relationship with the enterprise it provides the loans to.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 25/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Assessment of financial materiality
AR 13. The following are examples of how impacts and dependencies are sources of risks or opportunities:
(a) when the undertaking’s business model depends on a natural resource – for example water – it is likely to be
affected by changes in the quality, availability and pricing of that resource;
(b) when the undertaking’s activities result in negative impacts, e.g., on local communities, the activities could
become subject to stricter government regulation and/or the impact could trigger consequences of a
reputational nature. These might have negative effects on the undertaking’s brand and higher recruitment
costs might arise; and
(c) when the undertaking’s business partners face material sustainability-related risks, the undertaking could be
exposed to related consequences as well.
AR 14. The identification of risks and opportunities that affect or could reasonably be expected to affect the undertaking’s
financial position, financial performance, cash flows, access to finance or cost of capital over the short-, medium-
or long-term is the starting point for financial materiality assessment. In this context, the undertaking shall
consider:
(a) the existence of dependencies on natural and social resources as sources of financial effects (see paragraph 50);
(b) their classification as sources of:
i. risks (contributing to negative deviation in future expected cash inflows or increase in deviation in future
expected cash outflows and/or negative deviation from an expected change in capitals not recognised in
the financial statements); or
ii. opportunities (contributing to positive deviation in future expected cash inflows or decrease in deviation in
future cash outflows and/or positive deviation from expected change in capitals not recognised in financial
statements).
AR 15. Once the undertaking has identified its risks and opportunities, it shall determine which of them are material for
reporting. This shall be based on a combination of (i) the likelihood of occurrence and (ii) the potential magnitude
of financial effects determined on the basis of appropriate thresholds. In this step it shall consider the
contribution of those risks and opportunities to financial effects in the short-, medium- and long-term based on:
(a) scenarios/forecasts that are deemed likely to materialise; and
(b) potential financial effects related to sustainability matters deriving either from situations with a below the
“more likely than not” threshold or assets/liabilities not, or not yet, reflected in financial statements. This
includes:
i. potential situations that following the occurrence of future events may affect cash flow generation
potential;
ii. capitals that are not recognised as assets from an accounting and financial reporting perspective but have a
significant influence on financial performance, such as natural, intellectual (organisational), human, social
and relationship capitals; and
iii. possible future events that may have an influence on the evolution of such capitals.
Sustainability matters to be included in the materiality assessment
AR 16. When performing its materiality assessment, the undertaking shall consider the following list of sustainability
matters covered in the topical ESRS. When, as a result of the undertaking’s materiality assessment (see ESRS 2
IRO-1), a given sustainability matter in this list is assessed to be material, the undertaking shall report according
to the corresponding Disclosure Requirements of the relevant topical ESRS. Using this list is not a substitute for
the process of determining material matters. This list is a tool to support the undertaking’s materiality assessment.
The undertaking still needs to consider its own specific circumstances when determining its material matters. The
undertaking, where necessary, also shall develop entity-specific disclosures on material impacts, risks and
opportunities not covered by ESRS as described in paragraph 11 of this Standard.
26/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Topical
Sustainability matters covered in topical ESRS
ESRS
Topic Sub-topic Sub-sub-topics
ESRS E1 Climate change — Climate change adaptation
— Climate change mitigation
— Energy
ESRS E2 Pollution — Pollution of air
— Pollution of water
— Pollution of soil
— Pollution of living organisms and
food resources
— Substances of concern
— Substances of very high concern
— Microplastics
ESRS E3 Water and marine — Water — Water consumption
resources — Marine resources — Water withdrawals
— Water discharges
— Water discharges in the oceans
— Extraction and use of marine resources
ESRS E4 Biodiversity and — Direct impact drivers of biodiver­ — Climate Change
ecosystems sity loss — Land-use change, fresh water-use change
and sea-use change
— Direct exploitation
— Invasive alien species
— Pollution
— Others
— Impacts on the state of species Examples:
— Species population size
— Species global extinction risk
— Impacts on the extent and condi­ Examples:
tion of ecosystems — Land degradation
— Desertification
— Soil sealing
— Impacts and dependencies on eco­
system services
ESRS E5 Circular economy — Resources inflows, including
resource use
— Resource outflows related to pro­
ducts and services
— Waste
ESRS S1 Own workforce — Working conditions — Secure employment
— Working time
— Adequate wages
— Social dialogue
— Freedom of association, the existence of
works councils and the information, con­
sultation and participation rights of
workers
— Collective bargaining, including rate of
workers covered by collective agree­
ments
— Work-life balance
— Health and safety
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 27/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Topical
Sustainability matters covered in topical ESRS
ESRS
Topic Sub-topic Sub-sub-topics
— Equal treatment and opportunities — Gender equality and equal pay for work
for all of equal value
— Training and skills development
— Employment and inclusion of persons
with disabilities
— Measures against violence and harass­
ment in the workplace
— Diversity
— Other work-related rights — Child labour
— Forced labour
— Adequate housing
— Privacy
ESRS S2 Workers in the value — Working conditions — Secure employment
chain — Working time
— Adequate wages
— Social dialogue
— Freedom of association, including the
existence of work councils
— Collective bargaining
— Work-life balance
— Health and safety
— Equal treatment and opportunities — Gender equality and equal pay for work
for all of equal value
— Training and skills development
— The employment and inclusion of per­
sons with disabilities
— Measures against violence and harass­
ment in the workplace
— Diversity
— Other work-related rights — Child labour
— Forced labour
— Adequate housing
— Water and sanitation
— Privacy
ESRS S3 Affected — Communities’ economic, social — Adequate housing
communities and cultural rights — Adequate food
— Water and sanitation
— Land-related impacts
— Security-related impacts
— Communities’ civil and political — Freedom of expression
rights — Freedom of assembly
— Impacts on human rights defenders
— Rights of indigenous peoples — Free, prior and informed consent
— Self-determination
— Cultural rights
28/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Topical
Sustainability matters covered in topical ESRS
ESRS
Topic Sub-topic Sub-sub-topics
ESRS S4 Consumers and — Information-related impacts for — Privacy
end- users consumers and/or end-users — Freedom of expression
— Access to (quality) information
— Personal safety of consumers — Health and safety
and/or end-users — Security of a person
— Protection of children
— Social inclusion of consumers — Non-discrimination
and/or end-users — Access to products and services
— Responsible marketing practices
ESRS G1 Business conduct — Corporate culture
— Protection of whistle-blowers
— Animal welfare
— Political engagement and lobbying
activities
— Management of relationships with
suppliers including payment prac­
tices
— Corruption and bribery — Prevention and detection including train­
ing
— Incidents
Estimation using sector averages and proxies
AR 17. When the undertaking cannot collect upstream and downstream value chain information as required by
paragraph 63 after making reasonable efforts to do so, it shall estimate the information to be reported using all
reasonable and supportable information that is available to the undertaking at the reporting date without undue
cost or effort. This includes, but is not limited to, internal and external information, such as data from indirect
sources, sector-average data, sample analyses, market and peer groups data, other proxies or spend-based data.
Content and structure of the sustainability statement
AR 18. As an illustration for paragraph 115 in section 8.2 Content and structure of the sustainability statement of this
Standard, the undertaking that covers environmental and social matters in the same policy may cross-refer. That
means that the undertaking may report on the policy in its environmental disclosures and cross-refer to it from
the relevant social disclosures or vice versa. Consolidated presentation of policies across topics is allowed.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 29/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix B
Qualitative characteristics of information
This appendix is an integral part of ESRS 1 and has the same authority as the other parts of the Standard. This appendix
defines the qualitative characteristics that the information presented in the sustainability statement prepared according to
ESRS shall meet.
Relevance
QC 1. Sustainability information is relevant when it may make a difference in the decisions of users under a double
materiality approach (see chapter 3 of this Standard).
QC 2. Information may make a difference in a decision even if some users choose not to take advantage of it or are
already aware of it from other sources. Sustainability information may impact decisions of users if it has
predictive value, confirmatory value or both. Information has predictive value if it can be used as an input to
processes employed by users to predict future outcomes. Sustainability information does not need to be a
prediction or forecast to have predictive value, but rather has predictive value if employed by users in making
their own predictions.
QC 3. Information has confirmatory value if it provides feedback about (confirms or changes) previous evaluations.
QC 4. Materiality is an entity-specific aspect of relevance based on the nature or magnitude, or both, of the items to
which the information relates, as assessed in the context of the undertaking’s sustainability reporting (see chapter
3 of this Standard).
Faithful representation
QC 5. To be useful, the information must not only represent relevant phenomena, it must also faithfully represent the
substance of the phenomena that it purports to represent. Faithful representation requires information to be (i)
complete, (ii) neutral and (iii) accurate.
QC 6. A complete depiction of an impact, a risk or an opportunity includes all material information necessary for the
users to understand that impact, risk or opportunity. This includes how the undertaking has adapted its strategy,
risk management and governance in response to that impact, risk or opportunity, as well as the metrics identified
to set targets and measure performance.
QC 7. A neutral depiction is without bias in its selection or disclosure of information. Information is neutral if it is not
slanted, weighted, emphasised, de-emphasised or otherwise manipulated to make it more likely that the users will
receive that information favourably or unfavourably. It shall be balanced, so as to cover favourable/positive and
unfavourable/negative aspects. Both negative and positive material impacts from an impact materiality
perspective as well as material risks and opportunities from a financial materiality perspective shall receive
equal attention. Any aspirational sustainability information, for example targets or plans, shall cover both
aspirations and factors that could prevent the undertaking from achieving these aspirations in order to have a
neutral depiction.
QC 8. Neutrality is supported by the exercise of prudence which is the exercise of caution when making judgements
under conditions of uncertainty. Information shall not be netted or compensated to be neutral. The exercise of
prudence means that opportunities are not overstated and risks are not understated. Equally, the exercise of
prudence does not allow for the understatement of opportunities or the overstatement of risks. The undertaking
may present net information, in addition to gross values, if such presentation does not obscure relevant
information and includes a clear explanation about the effects of the netting and the reasons for the netting.
30/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
QC 9. Information can be accurate without being perfectly precise in all respects. Accurate information implies that the
undertaking has implemented adequate processes and internal controls to avoid material errors or material
misstatements. As such, estimates shall be presented with a clear emphasis on their possible limitations and
associated uncertainty (see section 7.2 of this Standard). The amount of precision needed and attainable, and the
factors that make information accurate, depend on the nature of the information and the nature of the matters it
addresses. For example, accuracy requires that:
(a) factual information is free from material error;
(b) descriptions are precise;
(c) estimates, approximations and forecasts are clearly identified as such;
(d) no material errors have been made in selecting and applying an appropriate process for developing an estimate,
approximation or forecast, and the inputs to that process are reasonable and supportable;
(e) assertions are reasonable and based on information of sufficient quality and quantity; and
(f) information about judgements about the future faithfully reflects both those judgements and the information
on which they are based.
Comparability
QC 10. Sustainability information is comparable when it can be compared with information provided by the undertaking
in previous periods and, can be compared with information provided by other undertakings, in particular those
with similar activities or operating within the same industry. A point of reference for comparison can be a target,
a baseline, an industry benchmark, comparable information from either other undertakings or from an
internationally recognised organisation, etc.
QC 11. Consistency is related to, but is not the same as, comparability. Consistency refers to the use of the same
approaches or methods for the same sustainability matter, from period to period by the undertaking and other
undertakings. Consistency helps to achieve the goal of comparability.
QC 12. Comparability is not uniformity. For information to be comparable, like components shall look alike and different
components shall look different. Comparability of sustainability information is not enhanced by making unlike
things look alike any more than it is enhanced by making like things look different.
Verifiability
QC 13. Verifiability helps to give users confidence that information is complete, neutral and accurate. Sustainability
information is verifiable if it is possible to corroborate the information itself or the inputs used to derive it.
QC 14. Verifiability means that various knowledgeable and independent observers could reach consensus, although not
necessarily complete agreement, that a particular depiction is a faithful representation. Sustainability information
shall be provided in a way that enhances its verifiability, for example:
(a) including information that can be corroborated by comparing it with other information available to users
about the undertaking’s business, about other businesses or about the external environment;
(b) providing information about inputs and methods of calculation used to produce estimates or approximations;
and
(c) providing information reviewed and agreed by the administrative, management and supervisory bodies or
their committees.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 31/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
QC 15. Some sustainability information will be in the form of explanations or forward-looking information. Those
disclosures can be supportable by faithfully representing on a factual basis for example the strategies, plans and
risk analyses of the undertaking. To help users decide whether to use such information, the undertaking shall
describe the underlying assumptions and methods of producing the information, as well as other factors that
provide evidence that it reflects the actual plans or decisions made by the undertaking.
Understandability
QC 16. Sustainability information is understandable when it is clear and concise. Understandable information enables any
reasonably knowledgeable user to readily comprehend the information being communicated.
QC 17. For sustainability disclosures to be concise, they need to (a) avoid generic “boilerplate” information, which is not
specific to the undertaking; (b) avoid unnecessary duplication of information, including information also
provided in financial statements; and (c) use clear language and well-structured sentences and paragraphs. Concise
disclosures shall only include material information. Complementary information presented pursuant to paragraph
113 shall be provided in a way that avoids obscuring material information.
QC 18. Clarity might be enhanced by distinguishing information about developments in the reporting period from
“standing” information that remains relatively unchanged from one period to the next. This can be done, for
example, by separately describing features of the undertaking’s sustainability-related governance and risk
management processes that have changed since the previous reporting period compared to those that remain
unchanged.
QC 19. The completeness, clarity and comparability of sustainability disclosures all rely on information being presented as
a coherent whole. For sustainability disclosures to be coherent, they shall be presented in a way that explains the
context and the connections between the related information. Coherence also requires the undertaking to provide
information in a way that allows users to relate information about its sustainability-related impacts, risks and
opportunities to information in the undertaking’s financial statements.
QC 20. If sustainability-related risks and opportunities discussed in the financial statements have implications for
sustainability reporting, the undertaking shall include in the sustainability statement the information necessary
for users to assess those implications and present appropriate links to the financial statements (see chapter 9 of
this Standard). The level of information, granularity and technicality shall be aligned with the needs and
expectations of users. Abbreviations shall be avoided and the units of measure shall be defined and disclosed.
32/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix C
List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements
This appendix is an integral part of ESRS 1 and has the same authority as the other parts of the Standard.
Disclosure Full name of the Disclosure
ESRS Phase-in or effective date (including the first year)
Requirement Requirement
ESRS 2 SBM-1 Strategy, business model and The undertaking shall report the information
value chain prescribed by ESRS 2 SBM-1 paragraph 40(b)
(breakdown of total revenue by significant ESRS
sector) and 40(c) (list of additional significant ESRS
sectors) starting from the application date specified
in a Commission Delegated Act to be adopted
pursuant to article 29b(1) third subparagraph,
point (ii), of Directive 2013/34/EU.
ESRS 2 SBM-3 Material impacts, risks and The undertaking may omit the information
opportunities and their prescribed by ESRS 2 SBM-3 paragraph 48(e)
interaction with strategy and (anticipated financial effects) for the first year of
business model preparation of its sustainability statement. The
undertaking may comply with ESRS 2 SBM-3
paragraph 48(e) by reporting only qualitative
disclosures for the first 3 years of preparation of its
sustainability statement, if it is impracticable to
prepare quantitative disclosures.
ESRS E1 E1-6 Gross Scopes 1, 2, 3 and Total Undertakings or groups not exceeding on their
GHG emissions balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year (on a
consolidated basis where applicable) may omit the
datapoints on scope 3 emissions and total GHG
emissions for the first year of preparation of their
sustainability statement.
ESRS E1 E1-9 Anticipated financial effects The undertaking may omit the information
from material physical and prescribed by ESRS E1-9 for the first year of
transition risks and potential preparation of its sustainability statement. The
climate-related opportunities undertaking may comply with ESRS E1-9 by
reporting only qualitative disclosures for the first 3
years of preparation of its sustainability statement, if
it is impracticable to prepare quantitative
disclosures.
ESRS E2 E2-6 Anticipated financial effects The undertaking may omit the information
from pollution-related prescribed by ESRS E2-6 for the first year of
impacts, risks and preparation of its sustainability statement. Except
opportunities for the information prescribed by paragraph 40 (b)
on the operating and capital expenditures occurred
in the reporting period in conjunction with major
incidents and deposits, the undertaking may
comply with ESRS E2-6 by reporting only
qualitative disclosures, for the first 3 years of
preparation of its sustainability statement.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 33/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Disclosure Full name of the Disclosure
ESRS Phase-in or effective date (including the first year)
Requirement Requirement
ESRS E3 E3-5 Anticipated financial effects The undertaking may omit the information
from water and marine prescribed by ESRS E3-5 for the first year of
resources-related impacts, preparation of its sustainability statement.The
risks and opportunities undertaking may comply with ESRS E3-5 by
reporting only qualitative disclosures, for the first 3
years of preparation of its sustainability statement.
ESRS E4 All disclosure All disclosure requirements Undertakings or groups not exceeding on their
requirements balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year (on a
consolidated basis where applicable) may omit the
information specified in the disclosure
requirements of ESRS E4 for the first 2 years of
preparation of their sustainability statement.
ESRS E4 E4-6 Anticipated financial effects The undertaking may omit the information
from biodiversity and prescribed by ESRS E4-6 for the first year of
ecosystem-related impacts, preparation of its sustainability statement.
risks and opportunities The undertaking may comply with ESRS E4-6 by
reporting only qualitative disclosures, for the first 3
years of preparation of its sustainability statement.
ESRS E5 E5-6 Anticipated financial effects The undertaking may omit the information
from resource use and prescribed by ESRS E5-6 for the first year of
circular economy-related preparation of its sustainability statement.
impacts, risks and The undertaking may comply with ESRS E5-6 by
opportunities reporting only qualitative disclosures, for the first 3
years of preparation of its sustainability statement.
ESRS S1 All disclosure All disclosure requirements Undertakings or groups not exceeding on their
requirements balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year (on a
consolidated basis where applicable) may omit the
information specified in the disclosure
requirements of ESRS S1 for the first year of
preparation of their sustainability statement.
ESRS S1 S1-7 Characteristics of non- The undertaking may omit reporting for all
employee workers in the datapoints in this Disclosure Requirement for the
undertaking’s own workforce first year of preparation of its sustainability
statement.
ESRS S1 S1-8 Collective bargaining coverage The undertaking may omit this Disclosure
and social dialogue Requirement with regard to its own employees in
non-EEA countries for the first year of preparation
of its sustainability statement.
34/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Disclosure Full name of the Disclosure
ESRS Phase-in or effective date (including the first year)
Requirement Requirement
ESRS S1 S1-11 Social protection The undertaking may omit the information
prescribed by ESRS S1-11 for the first year of
preparation of its sustainability statement.
ESRS S1 S1-12 Percentage of employees with The undertaking may omit the information
disabilities prescribed by ESRS S1-12 for the first year of
preparation of its sustainability statement.
ESRS S1 S1-13 Training and skills The undertaking may omit the information
development prescribed by ESRS S1-13 for the first year of
preparation of its sustainability statement.
ESRS S1 S1-14 Health and safety The undertaking may omit the data points on cases
of work-related ill-health and on number of days lost
to injuries, accidents, fatalities and work-related ill
health for the first year of preparation of its
sustainability statement.
ESRS S1 S1-14 Health and safety The undertaking may omit reporting on non-
employees for the first year of preparation of its
sustainability statement.
ESRS S1 S1-15 Work-life balance The undertaking may omit the information
prescribed by ESRS S1-15 for the first year of
preparation of its sustainability statement.
ESRS S2 All disclosure All disclosure requirements Undertakings or groups not exceeding on their
requirements balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year (on a
consolidated basis where applicable) may omit the
information specified in the disclosure
requirements of ESRS S2 for the first 2 years of
preparation of their sustainability statement.
ESRS S3 All disclosure All disclosure requirements Undertakings or groups not exceeding on their
requirements balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year (on a
consolidated basis where applicable) may omit the
information specified in the disclosure
requirements of ESRS S3 for the first 2 years of
preparation of their sustainability statement.
ESRS S4 All disclosure All disclosure requirements Undertakings or groups not exceeding on their
requirements balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year (on a
consolidated basis where applicable) may omit the
information specified in the disclosure
requirements of ESRS S4 for the first 2 years of
preparation of their sustainability statement.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 35/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix D
Structure of the ESRS sustainability statement
This appendix is an integral part of ESRS 1 and has the same authority as the other parts of the Standard with respect to
reporting in four parts as outlined in paragraph 115.
Part of the management report ESRS codification Title
1. General information ESRS 2 General disclosures, including information provided
under the Application Requirements of topical ESRS
listed in ESRS 2 Appendix C.
2. Environmental information Not applicable Disclosures pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation
(EU) 2020/852 (Taxonomy Regulation)
ESRS E1 Climate change
ESRS E2 Pollution
ESRS E3 Water and marine resources
ESRS E4 Biodiversity and ecosystems
ESRS E5 Resource use and circular economy
3. Social information ESRS S1 Own workforce
ESRS S2 Workers in the value chain
ESRS S3 Affected communities
ESRS S4 Consumers and end-users
4. Governance information ESRS G1 Business conduct
36/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix E
Flowchart for determining disclosures under ESRS
Materiality assessment is the starting point for sustainability reporting under ESRS. This appendix provides a non-binding
illustration of the impact- and financial materiality assessment outlined in chapter 3. IRO-1 in section 4.1 of ESRS 2
includes general disclosure requirements (DR) about the undertaking’s process to identify impacts, risks and opportunities
and assess their materiality. SBM-3 of ESRS 2 provides general disclosures requirements on the material impact, risks and
opportunities resulting from the undertaking’s materiality assessment. The undertaking can omit all disclosure
requirements in a topical standard if it assessed that the topic in question is not material. In that case it may disclose a brief
explanation of the conclusions of the materiality assessment for that topic but shall disclose a detailed explanation in the
case of ESRS E1 climate change (IRO-2 ESRS 2). ESRS set disclosure requirements, not behavioral requirements. Disclosure
requirements in relation to action plans, targets, policies, scenario analysis and transition plans are proportionate
because they are contingent on the undertaking having these, which may depend on the size, capacity, resources, and skills
of the undertaking. Note: The flowchart below does not cover the situation in which the undertaking assesses a sustainability matter as
material but it is not covered by a topical standard, in which case the undertaking shall make additional entity specific disclosures (ESRS
1 (30 (b)).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 37/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix F
Example of structure of ESRS sustainability statement
This appendix complements ESRS 1. It provides a non-binding illustration of the structure of the sustainability statement
outlined in section 8.2 of this Standard. In this illustration, the undertaking has concluded that biodiversity and ecosystems,
pollution, and affected communities, are not material.
38/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix G
Example of incorporation by reference
This appendix complements ESRS 1. It provides non-binding illustrations of incorporation by reference of another section
of the management report into the sustainability statement as outlined in section 9.1 of this Standard.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 39/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
ESRS 2
GENERAL DISCLOSURES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Objective
1. Basis for preparation
– Disclosure Requirement BP-1 – General basis for preparation of sustainability statements
– Disclosure Requirement BP-2 – Disclosures in relation to specific circumstances
2. Governance
– Disclosure Requirement GOV-1 – The role of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies
– Disclosure Requirement GOV-2 – Information provided to and sustainability matters addressed by the
undertaking’s administrative, management and supervisory bodies
– Disclosure Requirement GOV-3 - Integration of sustainability-related performance in incentive schemes
– Disclosure Requirement GOV-4 - Statement on due diligence
– Disclosure Requirement GOV-5 - Risk management and internal controls over sustainability reporting
3. Strategy
– Disclosure Requirement SBM-1 – Strategy, business model and value chain
– Disclosure Requirement SBM-2 – Interests and views of stakeholders
– Disclosure Requirement SBM-3 - Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with
strategy and business model
4. Impact, risk and opportunity management
4.1 Disclosures on the materiality assessment process
– Disclosure Requirement IRO-1 - Description of the processes to identify and assess material impacts,
risks and opportunities
– Disclosure Requirement IRO-2 – Disclosure requirements in ESRS covered by the undertaking’s
sustainability statement
4.2 Minimum disclosure requirement on policies and actions
– Minimum disclosure requirement - Policies MDR-P – Policies adopted to manage material
sustainability matters
– Minimum disclosure requirement - Actions MDR-A – Actions and resources in relation to material
sustainability matters
5. Metrics and targets
– Minimum disclosure requirement – Metrics MDR-M – Metrics in relation to material sustainability
matters
– Minimum disclosure requirement – Targets MDR-T – Tracking effectiveness of policies and actions
through targets
Appendix A: Application Requirements
1. Basis for preparation
– Disclosure Requirement BP-1 – General basis for preparation of the sustainability statement
2. Governance
– Disclosure Requirement GOV-1 – The role of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies
– Disclosure Requirement GOV-2 – Information provided to and sustainability matters addressed by the undertaking’s
administrative, management and supervisory bodies
– Disclosure Requirement GOV-3 – Integration of sustainability-related performance in incentive schemes
40/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
– Disclosure Requirement GOV-4 – Statement on due diligence
– Disclosure Requirement GOV-5 – Risk management and internal controls over sustainability reporting
3. Strategy
– Disclosure Requirement SBM–1 Strategy, business model and value chain
– Disclosure Requirement SBM-2 – Interests and views of stakeholders
– Disclosure Requirement SBM-3 - Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and
business model
4. Impact, risk and opportunity management
– Disclosure Requirement IRO-2 – Disclosure requirements in ESRS covered by the undertaking’s sustainability
statement
– Minimum Disclosure Requirement - Policies MDR-P – Policies adopted to manage material sustainability matters
– Minimum Disclosure Requirement - Actions MDR-A – Actions and resources in relation to material sustainability
matters
5. Metrics and targets
– Minimum Disclosure Requirement - Targets MDR-T – Tracking effectiveness of policies and actions through targets
Appendix B: List of datapoints in cross-cutting and topical standards that derive from other EU legislation
Appendix C: Disclosure/Application Requirements in topical ESRS that are applicable jointly with ESRS 2 General
Disclosures
Objective
1. This ESRS sets out the disclosure requirements that apply to all undertakings regardless of their sector of activity (i.e.,
sector agnostic) and apply across sustainability topics (i.e., cross-cutting). This ESRS covers the reporting areas
defined in ESRS 1 General requirements section 1.2 Cross-Cutting Standards and reporting areas.
2. In the preparation of disclosures under this Standard, the undertaking shall apply the Disclosure Requirements
(including their datapoints) set in topical ESRS, as listed in Appendix C of this Standard Disclosure/Application
Requirements in topical ESRS that are applicable jointly with ESRS 2 General Disclosures. The undertaking shall apply the
requirements listed in Appendix C:
(a) in all instances for the requirements in topical standards related to Disclosure Requirement IRO-1 Description of
the processes to identify and assess material impacts, risks and opportunities; and
(b) for all other requirements listed in appendix C, only if the sustainability topic is material based on the
undertaking’s materiality assessment (see ESRS 1 chapter 3 Double materiality as the basis for sustainability
disclosures).
1. Basis for preparation
Disclosure Requirement BP-1 – General basis for preparation of the sustainability statement
3. The undertaking shall disclose the general basis for preparation of its sustainability statement.
4. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of how the undertaking prepares its
sustainability statement, including the scope of consolidation, the upstream and downstream value chain
information and, where relevant, whether the undertaking has used any of the options for omitting information
referred to in points d) and e) in the following paragraph.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 41/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
5. The undertaking shall disclose the following information:
(a) whether the sustainability statement has been prepared on a consolidated or individual basis;
(b) for consolidated sustainability statements:
i. a confirmation that the scope of consolidation is the same as for the financial statements, or, where
applicable, a declaration that the reporting undertaking is not required to draw-up financial statements or
that the reporting undertaking is preparing consolidated sustainability reporting pursuant to Article 48i of
Directive 2013/34/EU; and
ii. where applicable, an indication of which subsidiary undertakings included in the consolidation are exempted
from individual or consolidated sustainability reporting pursuant to Articles 19a(9) or 29a(8) of
Directive 2013/34/EU;
(c) to what extent the sustainability statement covers the undertaking’s upstream and downstream value chain (see
ESRS 1 section 5.1 Reporting undertaking and value chain);
(d) whether the undertaking has used the option to omit a specific piece of information corresponding to intellectual
property, know-how or the results of innovation (see ESRS 1 section 7.7 Classified and sensitive information and
information on intellectual property, know-how or results of innovation); and
(e) for undertakings based in an EU member state that allows for the exemption from disclosure of impending
developments or matters in the course of negotiation, as provided for in articles 19a(3) and 29a(3) of
Directive 2013/34/EU, whether the undertaking has used that exemption.
Disclosure Requirement BP-2 – Disclosures in relation to specific circumstances
6. The undertaking shall provide disclosures in relation to specific circumstances.
7. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of the effect of these specific
circumstances on the preparation of the sustainability statement.
8. The undertaking may report this information alongside the disclosures to which they refer.
Time horizons
9. When the undertaking has deviated from the medium- or long-term time horizons defined by ESRS 1 section 6.4
Definition of short-, medium- and long-term for reporting purposes, it shall describe:
(a) its definitions of medium- or long-term time horizons; and
(b) the reasons for applying those definitions.
Value chain estimation
10. When metrics include upstream and/or downstream value chain data estimated using indirect sources, such as
sector-average data or other proxies, the undertaking shall:
(a) identify the metrics;
(b) describe the basis for preparation;
(c) describe the resulting level of accuracy; and
(d) where applicable, describe the planned actions to improve the accuracy in the future (see ESRS 1 chapter 5 Value
chain).
Sources of estimation and outcome uncertainty
11. In accordance with ESRS 1 section 7.2 Sources of estimation and outcome uncertainty, the undertaking shall:
(a) identify the quantitative metrics and monetary amounts it has disclosed that are subject to a high level of
measurement uncertainty;
42/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) in relation to each quantitative metric and monetary amount identified:
i. disclose information about the sources of measurement uncertainty (for example, the dependence of the
amount on the outcome of a future event, on a measurement technique or on the availability and quality of
data from the entity’s upstream and/or downstream value chain); and
ii. disclose the assumptions, approximations and judgements the entity has made in measuring it.
12. When disclosing forward-looking information, the undertaking may indicate that it considers such information to be
uncertain.
Changes in preparation or presentation of sustainability information
13. When changes in the preparation and presentation of sustainability information occur compared to the previous
reporting period(s), (see ESRS 1 section 7.4 Changes in preparation or presentation in sustainability information), the
undertaking shall:
(a) explain the changes and the reasons for them, including why the replaced metric provides more useful
information;
(b) disclose revised comparative figures, unless it is impracticable to do so. When it is impracticable to adjust
comparative information for one or more prior periods, the undertaking shall disclose that fact; and
(c) disclose the difference between the figure disclosed in the preceding period and the revised comparative figure.
Reporting errors in prior periods
14. When the undertaking identifies material prior period errors (see ESRS 1 section 7.5 Reporting errors in prior periods), it
shall disclose:
(a) the nature of the prior period material error;
(b) to the extent practicable, the correction for each prior period included in the sustainability statement; and
(c) if correction of the error is not practicable, the circumstances that led to the existence of that condition.
Disclosures stemming from other legislation or generally accepted sustainability reporting pronouncements
15. When the undertaking includes in its sustainability statement information stemming from other legislation which
requires the undertaking to disclose sustainability information or from generally accepted sustainability reporting
standards and frameworks (see ESRS 1 section 8.2 Content and structure of the sustainability statement), in addition to
the information prescribed by ESRS, it shall disclose this fact. In case of partial application of other reporting
standards or frameworks, the undertaking shall provide a precise reference to the paragraphs of the standard or
framework applied.
Incorporation by reference
16. When the undertaking incorporates information by reference (see ESRS 1 section 9.1 Incorporation by reference), it shall
disclose a list of the disclosure requirements of ESRS, or the specific datapoints mandated by a Disclosure
Requirement, that have been incorporated by reference.
Use of phase-In provisions in accordance with Appendix C of ESRS 1
17. If an undertaking or group not exceeding on its balance sheet date the average number of 750 employees during the
financial year decides to omit the information required by ESRS E4, ESRS S1, ESRS S2, ESRS S3 or ESRS S4 in
accordance with Appendix C of ESRS 1, it shall nevertheless disclose whether the sustainability topics covered
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 43/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
respectively by ESRS E4, ESRS S1, ESRS S2, ESRS S3 and ESRS S4 have been assessed to be material as a result of the
undertaking’s materiality assessment. In addition, if one or more of these topics has been assessed to be material, the
undertaking shall, for each material topic:
(a) disclose the list of matters (i.e. topic, sub-topic or sub-sub-topic) in AR 16 ESRS 1 Appendix A that are assessed
to be material and briefly describe how the undertaking’s business model and strategy take account of the
impacts of the undertaking related to those matters. The undertaking may identify the matter at the level of
topic, sub-topic or sub-sub-topic;
(b) briefly describe any time-bound targets it has set related to the matters in question, the progress it has made
towards achieving those targets, and whether its targets related to biodiversity and ecosystems are based on
conclusive scientific evidence;
(c) briefly describe its policies in relation to the matters in question;
(d) briefly describe actions it has taken to identify, monitor, prevent, mitigate, remediate or bring an end to actual or
potential adverse impacts related to the matters in question, and the result of such actions; and
(e) disclose metrics relevant to the matters in question.
2. Governance
18. The objective of this chapter is to set disclosure requirements that enable an understanding of the governance
processes, controls and procedures put in place to monitor, manage and oversee sustainability matters.
Disclosure Requirement GOV-1 – The role of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies
19. The undertaking shall disclose the composition of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies, their
roles and responsibilities and access to expertise and skills with regard to sustainability matters.
20. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of:
(a) the composition and diversity of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies;
(b) the roles and responsibilities of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies in exercising oversight
of the process to manage material impacts, risks and opportunities, including management’s role in these
processes; and
(c) the expertise and skills of its administrative, management and supervisory bodies on sustainability matters or
access to such expertise and skills.
21. The undertaking shall disclose the following information about the composition and diversity of the members of the
undertaking’s administrative, management and supervisory bodies:
(a) the number of executive and non-executive members;
(b) representation of employees and other workers;
(c) experience relevant to the sectors, products and geographic locations of the undertaking;
44/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(d) percentage by gender and other aspects of diversity that the undertaking considers. The board's gender
diversity(13)shall be calculated as an average ratio of female to male board members; and
(e) the percentage of independent board members(14). For undertakings with a unitary board, this corresponds to
the percentage of independent non-executive board members. For undertakings with a dual board, it
corresponds to the percentage of independent members of the supervisory body.
22. The undertaking shall disclose the following information about the roles and responsibilities of the administrative,
management and supervisory bodies:
(a) the identity of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies (such as a board committee or similar)
or individual(s) within a body responsible for oversight of impacts, risks and opportunities;
(b) how each body’s or individual’s responsibilities for impacts, risks and opportunities are reflected in the
undertaking’s terms of reference, board mandates and other related policies;
(c) a description of management’s role in the governance processes, controls and procedures used to monitor,
manage and oversee impacts, risks and opportunities, including:
i. whether that role is delegated to a specific management-level position or committee and how oversight is
exercised over that position or committee;
ii. information about the reporting lines to the administrative, management and supervisory bodies;
iii. whether dedicated controls and procedures are applied to the management of impacts, risks and
opportunities and, if so, how they are integrated with other internal functions; and
(d) how the administrative, management and supervisory bodies and senior executive management oversee the
setting of targets related to material impacts, risks and opportunities, and how they monitor progress towards
them.
23. The disclosure shall include a description of how the administrative, management and supervisory bodies determine
whether appropriate skills and expertise are available or will be developed to oversee sustainability matters,
including:
(a) the sustainability-related expertise that the bodies, as a whole, either directly possess or can leverage, for example
through access to experts or training; and
(b) how those skills and expertise relate to the undertaking's material impacts, risks and opportunities.
(13) This information supports the information needs of: financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts set out by indicator #13 in Table I of Annex I of Commission
Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 of 6 April 2022 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 of the European Parliament and of
the Council with regard to disclosures rules on sustainable investments (“Board gender diversity”) and benchmark administrators to
disclose ESG factors subject to Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1816 of 17 July 2020 supplementing Regulation
(EU) 2016/1011 of the European Parliament and of the Council as set out by indicator “Weighted average ratio of female to male
board members” in section 1 and 2 of Annex II.
(14) This information supports the information needs of benchmark administrators to disclose ESG factors subject to Regulation
(EU) 2020/1816 as set out by indicator “Weighted average percentage of board members who are independent” in section I of
Annex II.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 45/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Disclosure Requirement GOV-2 – Information provided to and sustainability matters addressed by the undertaking’s
administrative, management and supervisory bodies
24. The undertaking shall disclose how the administrative, management and supervisory bodies are informed
about sustainability matters and how these matters were addressed during the reporting period.
25. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of how administrative, management
and supervisory bodies are informed about sustainability matters, as well as what information and matters they
addressed during the reporting period. This in turn allows an understanding of whether the members of these
bodies were adequately informed and whether they were able to fulfil their roles.
26. The undertaking shall disclose the following information:
(a) whether, by whom and how frequently the administrative, management and supervisory bodies, including their
relevant committees, are informed about material impacts, risks and opportunities (see Disclosure Requirement
IRO–1 - Description of the processes to identify and assess material impacts, risks and opportunities of this Standard), the
implementation of due diligence, and the results and effectiveness of policies, actions, metrics and targets
adopted to address them;
(b) how the administrative, management and supervisory bodies consider impacts, risks and opportunities when
overseeing the undertaking’s strategy, its decisions on major transactions, and its risk management process,
including whether they have considered trade-offs associated with those impacts, risks and opportunities; and
(c) a list of the material impacts, risks and opportunities addressed by the administrative, management and
supervisory bodies, or their relevant committees during the reporting period.
Disclosure Requirement GOV-3 – Integration of sustainability-related performance in incentive schemes
27. The undertaking shall disclose information about the integration of its sustainability-related performance in
incentive schemes.
28. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of whether incentive schemes are offered
to members of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies that are linked to sustainability matters.
29. The undertaking shall disclose the following information about the incentive schemes and remuneration policies
linked to sustainability matters for members of the undertaking's administrative, management and supervisory
bodies, where they exist:
(a) a description of the key characteristics of the incentive schemes;
(b) whether performance is being assessed against specific sustainability-related targets and/or impacts, and if so,
which ones;
(c) whether and how sustainability-related performance metrics are considered as performance benchmarks or
included in remuneration policies;
(d) the proportion of variable remuneration dependent on sustainability-related targets and/or impacts; and
(e) the level in the undertaking at which the terms of incentive schemes are approved and updated.
Disclosure Requirement GOV–4 - Statement on due diligence
30. The undertaking shall disclose a mapping of the information provided in its sustainability statement about
the due diligence process.
31. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to facilitate an understanding of the undertaking’s due diligence
process with regard to sustainability matters.
46/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
32. The main aspects and steps of due diligence referred to under ESRS 1 chapter 4 Due diligence are related to a number
of cross-cutting and topical Disclosure Requirements under the ESRS. The undertaking shall provide a mapping that
explains how and where its application of the main aspects and steps of the due diligence process are reflected in its
sustainability statement, to allow a depiction of the actual practices of the undertaking with regard to due
diligence(15).
33. This disclosure requirement does not mandate any specific behavioural requirements with regard to due diligence
actions and does not extend or modify the role of administrative, management and supervisory bodies as
mandated by other legislation or regulation.
Disclosure Requirement GOV–5 - Risk management and internal controls over sustainability reporting
34. The undertaking shall disclose the main features of its risk management and internal control system in
relation to the sustainability reporting process.
35. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of the undertaking’s risk management
and internal control processes in relation to sustainability reporting.
36. The undertaking shall disclose the following information:
(a) the scope, main features and components of the risk management and internal control processes and systems in
relation to sustainability reporting;
(b) the risk assessment approach followed, including the risk prioritisation methodology;
(c) the main risks identified and their mitigation strategies including related controls;
(d) a description of how the undertaking integrates the findings of its risk assessment and internal controls as regards
the sustainability reporting process into relevant internal functions and processes; and
(e) a description of the periodic reporting of the findings referred to in point (d) to the administrative, management
and supervisory bodies.
3. Strategy
37. This chapter sets disclosure requirements that enable an understanding of:
(a) the elements of the undertaking’s strategy that relate to or affect sustainability matters, its business model and
its value chain;
(b) how the interests and views of the undertaking’s stakeholders are taken into account by the undertaking’s
strategy and business model; and
(c) the outcome of the undertaking’s assessment of material impacts, risks and opportunities, including how they
inform its strategy and business model.
Disclosure Requirement SBM-1 – Strategy, business model and value chain
38. The undertaking shall disclose the elements of its strategy that relate to or impact sustainability matters, its
business model and its value chain.
39. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to describe the key elements of the undertaking’s general strategy that
relate to or affect sustainability matters, and the key elements of the undertaking’s business model and value chain,
in order to provide an understanding of its exposure to impacts, risks and opportunities and where they originate.
(15) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #10 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Lack of due
diligence”).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 47/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
40. The undertaking shall disclose the following information about the key elements of its general strategy that relate to
or affect sustainability matters:
(a) a description of:
i. significant groups of products and/or services offered, including changes in the reporting
period (new/removed products and/or services);
ii. significant markets and/or customer groups served, including changes in the reporting period (new/removed
markets and/or customer groups);
iii. headcount of employees by geographical areas; and
iv. where applicable and material, products and services that are banned in certain markets;
(b) a breakdown of total revenue, as included in its financial statements, by significant ESRS sectors. When the
undertaking provides segment reporting as required by IFRS 8 Operating segments in its financial statements, this
sector revenue information shall be, as far as possible, reconciled with IFRS 8 information;
(c) a list of the additional significant ESRS sectors beyond the ones reflected under paragraph 40(b), such as activities
that give rise to intercompany revenues, in which the undertaking develops significant activities, or in which it is
or may be connected to material impacts. The identification of these additional ESRS sectors shall be consistent
with the way they have been considered by the undertaking when performing its materiality assessment and
with the way it discloses material sector-specific information;
(d) where applicable, a statement indicating, together with the related revenues, that the undertaking is active in:
i. the fossil fuel (coal, oil and gas) sector(16), (i.e., it derives revenues from exploration, mining, extraction,
production, processing, storage, refining or distribution, including transportation, storage and trade, of fossil
fuels as defined in Article 2, point (62), of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and the
Council(17)), including a disaggregation of revenues derived from coal, from oil and from gas, as well as the
revenues derived from Taxonomy-aligned economic activities related to fossil gas as required under
Article 8(7)(a) of Commission Delegated Regulation 2021/2178(18);
ii. chemicals production(19), i.e., its activities fall under Division 20.2 of Annex I to Regulation (EC)
No 1893/2006;
iii. controversial weapons(20) (anti-personnel mines, cluster munitions, chemical weapons and biological
weapons); and/or
(16) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts set out by indicator #4 in Table I of Annex I of Commission
Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosures rules on sustainable investments (“Exposure to companies active in
the fossil fuel sector”).
(17) Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the Governance of the Energy
Union and Climate Action, amending Regulations (EC) No 663/2009 and (EC) No 715/2009 of the European Parliament and of the
Council, Directives 94/22/EC, 98/70/EC, 2009/31/EC, 2009/73/EC, 2010/31/EU, 2012/27/EU and 2013/30/EU of the European
Parliament and of the Council, Council Directives 2009/119/EC and (EU) 2015/652 and repealing Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of
the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 1).
(18) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2178 of 6 July 2021 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European
Parliament and of the Council by specifying the content and presentation of information to be disclosed by undertakings subject to
Articles 19a or 29a of Directive 2013/34/EU concerning environmentally sustainable economic activities, and specifying the
methodology to comply with that disclosure obligation (OJ L 443, 10.12.2021, p. 9).
(19) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts set out by indicator #9 in Table II of Annex I of Commission
Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosures rules on sustainable investments (“Investments in companies
producing chemicals”).
(20) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts set out by indicator #14 in Table I of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosures rules on sustainable investments (“Exposure to
controversial weapons (anti-personnel mines, cluster munitions, chemical weapons and biological weapons)”).
48/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
iv. the cultivation and production of tobacco(21);
(e) its sustainability-related goals in terms of significant groups of products and services, customer categories,
geographical areas and relationships with stakeholders;
(f) an assessment of its current significant products and/or services, and significant markets and customer groups, in
relation to its sustainability-related goals; and
(g) the elements of the undertaking’s strategy that relate to or impact sustainability matters, including the main
challenges ahead, critical solutions or projects to be put in place, when relevant for sustainability reporting.
41. If the undertaking is based in an EU Member State that allows for an exemption from the disclosure of the
information referred to in Article 18, paragraph 1, sub-point (a) of Directive 2013/34/EU(22), and if the undertaking
has made use of that exemption, it may omit the breakdown of revenue by significant ESRS sector required by
paragraph 40(b). In this case the undertaking shall nevertheless disclose the list of ESRS sectors that are significant
for the undertaking.
42. The undertaking shall disclose a description of its business model and value chain, including:
(a) its inputs and its approach to gathering, developing and securing those inputs;
(b) its outputs and outcomes in terms of current and expected benefits for customers, investors and other
stakeholders; and
(c) the main features of its upstream and downstream value chain and the undertaking’s position in its value chain,
including a description of the main business actors (such as key suppliers, customers, distribution channels and
end-users) and their relationship to the undertaking. When the undertaking has multiple value chains, the
disclosure shall cover the key value chains.
Disclosure Requirement SBM-2 – Interests and views of stakeholders
43. The undertaking shall disclose how the interests and views of its stakeholders are taken into account by the
undertaking’s strategy and business model.
44. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of how stakeholders’ interests and views
inform the undertaking’s strategy and business model.
45. The undertaking shall disclose a summarised description of:
(a) its stakeholder engagement, including:
i. the undertaking’s key stakeholders;
ii. whether engagement with them occurs and for which categories of stakeholders;
iii. how it is organised;
iv. its purpose; and
v. how its outcome is taken into account by the undertaking;
(b) the undertaking’s understanding of the interests and views of its key stakeholders as they relate to the
undertaking’s strategy and business model, to the extent that these were analysed during the undertaking’s due
diligence process and/or materiality assessment process (see Disclosure Requirement IRO-1 of this Standard);
(c) where applicable, amendments to its strategy and/or business model, including:
i. how the undertaking has amended or expects to amend its strategy and/or business model to address the
interests and views of its stakeholders;
(21) This information supports the needs of benchmark administrators to disclose ESG factors subject to Regulation (EU) 2020/1818 as set
out by paragraph b) of article 12.1.
(22) Article 18, paragraph 1, sub-point (a) of Directive 2013/34/EU: “the net turnover broken down by categories of activity and into geographical
markets, in so far as those categories and markets differ substantially from one another, taking account of the manner in which the sale of products
and the provision of services are organised.”
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 49/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
ii. any further steps that are being planned and in what timeline; and
iii. whether these steps are likely to modify the relationship with and views of stakeholders; and
(d) whether and how the administrative, management and supervisory bodies are informed about the views and
interests of affected stakeholders with regard to the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts.
Disclosure Requirement SBM-3 - Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and
business model
46. The undertaking shall disclose its material impacts, risks and opportunities and how they interact with its
strategy and business model.
47. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of the material impacts, risks and
opportunities as they result from the undertaking’s materiality assessment and how they originate from and trigger
adaptation of the undertaking’s strategy and business model including its resources allocation. The information to
be disclosed about the management of the undertaking’s material impacts, risks and opportunities is prescribed in
topical ESRS and in sector-specific standards, which shall be applied in conjunction with the Minimum Disclosure
Requirements on policies, actions and targets established in this Standard.
48. The undertaking shall disclose:
(a) a brief description of its material impacts, risks and opportunities resulting from its materiality assessment (see
Disclosure Requirement IRO-1 of this standard), including a description of where in its business model, its own
operations and its upstream and downstream value chain these material impacts, risks and opportunities are
concentrated;
(b) the current and anticipated effects of its material impacts, risks and opportunities on its business model, value
chain, strategy and decision-making, and how it has responded or plans to respond to these effects, including
any changes it has made or plans to make to its strategy or business model as part of its actions to address
particular material impacts or risks, or to pursue particular material opportunities;
(c) with reference to the undertaking’s material impacts:
i. how the undertaking’s material negative and positive impacts affect (or, in the case of potential impacts, are
likely to affect) people or the environment;
ii. whether and how the impacts originate from or are connected to the undertaking's strategy and business
model;
iii. the reasonably expected time horizons of the impacts; and
iv. whether the undertaking is involved with the material impacts through its activities or because of its business
relationships, describing the nature of the activities or business relationships concerned;
(d) the current financial effects of the undertaking’s material risks and opportunities on its financial position,
financial performance and cash flows and the material risks and opportunities for which there is a significant
risk of a material adjustment within the next annual reporting period to the carrying amounts of assets and
liabilities reported in the related financial statements;
(e) the anticipated financial effects of the undertaking’s material risks and opportunities on its financial position,
financial performance and cash flows over the short-, medium- and long-term, including the reasonably
expected time horizons for those effects. This shall include how the undertaking expects its financial position,
financial performance and cash flows to change over the short, medium- and long-term, given its strategy to
manage risks and opportunities, taking into consideration:
i. its investment and disposal plans (for example, capital expenditure, major acquisitions and divestments, joint
ventures, business transformation, innovation, new business areas and asset retirements), including plans the
undertaking is not contractually committed to; and
ii. its planned sources of funding to implement its strategy.
50/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(f) information about the resilience of the undertaking's strategy and business model regarding its capacity to
address its material impacts and risks and to take advantage of its material opportunities. The undertaking shall
disclose a qualitative and, when applicable, a quantitative analysis of the resilience, including how the analysis
was conducted and the time horizons that were applied as defined in ESRS 1 (see ESRS 1 chapter 6 Time
horizons). When providing quantitative information, the undertaking may disclose single amounts or ranges;
(g) changes to the material impacts, risks and opportunities compared to the previous reporting period; and
(h) a specification of those impacts, risks and opportunities that are covered by ESRS Disclosure Requirements as
opposed to those covered by the undertaking using additional entity-specific disclosures.
49. The undertaking may disclose the descriptive information required in paragraph 46 alongside the disclosures
provided under the corresponding topical ESRS, in which case it shall still present a statement of its material
impacts, risks and opportunities alongside its disclosures prepared under this chapter of ESRS 2.
4. Impact, risk and opportunity management
4.1 Disclosures on the materiality assessment process
50. This chapter sets disclosure requirements that enable an understanding of:
(a) the process to identify material impacts, risks and opportunities; and
(b) the information that, as a result of its materiality assessment, the undertaking has included in its sustainability
statement.
Disclosure Requirement IRO-1 - Description of the process to identify and assess material impacts, risks and
opportunities
51. The undertaking shall disclose its process to identify its impacts, risks and opportunities and to assess
which ones are material.
52. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of the process through which the
undertaking identifies impacts, risks and opportunities and assesses their materiality, as the basis for determining
the disclosures in its sustainability statement (see ESRS 1 chapter 3 and its related Application Requirements, which
set out requirements and principles regarding the process to identify and assess material impacts, risks and
opportunities based on the principle of double materiality).
53. The undertaking shall disclose the following information:
(a) a description of the methodologies and assumptions applied in the described process;
(b) an overview of the process to identify, assess, prioritise and monitor the undertaking’s potential and actual
impacts on people and the environment, informed by the undertaking’s due diligence process, including an
explanation of whether and how the process:
i. focusses on specific activities, business relationships, geographies or other factors that give rise to heightened
risk of adverse impacts;
ii. considers the impacts with which the undertaking is involved through its own operations or as a result of its
business relationships;
iii. includes consultation with affected stakeholders to understand how they may be impacted and with external
experts;
iv. prioritises negative impacts based on their relative severity and likelihood, (see ESRS 1 section 3.4 Impact
materiality) and, if applicable, positive impacts on their relative scale, scope and likelihood, and determines
which sustainability matters are material for reporting purposes, including the qualitative or quantitative
thresholds and other criteria used as prescribed by ESRS 1 section 3.4 Impact materiality;
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 51/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(c) an overview of the process used to identify, assess, prioritise and monitor risks and opportunities that have or
may have financial effects. The disclosure shall include:
i. how the undertaking has considered the connections of its impacts and dependencies with the risks and
opportunities that may arise from those impacts and dependencies;
ii. how the undertaking assesses the likelihood, magnitude, and nature of effects of the identified risk and
opportunities (such as the qualitative or quantitative thresholds and other criteria used as prescribed by
ESRS 1 section 3.3 Financial materiality);
iii. how the undertaking prioritises sustainability-related risks relative to other types of risks, including its use of
risk-assessment tools;
(d) a description of the decision-making process and the related internal control procedures;
(e) the extent to which and how the process to identify, assess and manage impacts and risks is integrated into the
undertaking’s overall risk management process and used to evaluate the undertaking’s overall risk profile and
risk management processes;
(f) the extent to which and how the process to identify, assess and manage opportunities is integrated into the
undertaking’s overall management process where applicable;
(g) the input parameters it uses (for example, data sources, the scope of operations covered and the detail used in
assumptions); and
(h) whether and how the process has changed compared to the prior reporting period, when the process was
modified for the last time and future revision dates of the materiality assessment.
Disclosure Requirement IRO-2 – Disclosure Requirements in ESRS covered by the undertaking’s sustainability
statement
54. The undertaking shall report on the Disclosure Requirements complied with in its sustainability statements.
55. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of the Disclosure Requirements included
in the undertaking’s sustainability statement and of the topics that have been omitted as not material, as a result of
the materiality assessment.
56. The undertaking shall include a list of the Disclosure Requirements complied with in preparing the sustainability
statement, following the outcome of the materiality assessment (see ESRS 1 chapter 3), including the page
numbers and/or paragraphs where the related disclosures are located in the sustainability statement. This may be
presented as a content index. The undertaking shall also include a table of all the datapoints that derive from other
EU legislation as listed in Appendix B of this standard, indicating where they can be found in the sustainability
statement and including those that the undertaking has assessed as not material, in which case the undertaking shall
indicate “Not material” in the table in accordance with ESRS 1 paragraph 35.
57. If the undertaking concludes that climate change is not material and therefore omits all disclosure requirements in
ESRS E1 Climate change, it shall disclose a detailed explanation of the conclusions of its materiality assessment with
regard to climate change (see ESRS 2 IRO-2 Disclosure Requirements in ESRS covered by the undertaking’s sustainability
statement), including a forward-looking analysis of the conditions that could lead the undertaking to conclude that
climate change is material in the future.
58. If the undertaking concludes that a topic other than climate change is not material and therefore omits all the
Disclosure Requirements in the corresponding topical ESRS, it may provide a brief explanation of the conclusions of
its materiality assessment for that topic.
52/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
59. The undertaking shall provide an explanation of how it has determined the material information to be disclosed in
relation to the impacts, risks and opportunities that it has assessed to be material, including the use of
thresholds and/or how it has implemented the criteria in ESRS 1 section 3.2 Material matters and materiality of
information.
4.2 Minimum disclosure requirements on policies and actions
60. This section sets out minimum disclosure requirements to be included when the undertaking discloses information
on its policies and actions to prevent, mitigate and remediate actual and potential material impacts, to address
material risks and/or to pursue material opportunities (collectively, to “manage material sustainability matters”).
They shall be applied together with the Disclosure Requirements, including Application Requirements, provided in
the relevant topical and sector-specific ESRS. They shall also be applied when the undertaking prepares entity-
specific disclosures.
61. The corresponding disclosures shall be located alongside disclosures prescribed by the relevant ESRS. When a single
policy or same actions address several interconnected sustainability matters, the undertaking may disclose the
required information in its reporting under one topical ESRS and cross reference to it in its reporting under other
topical ESRS.
62. If the undertaking cannot disclose the information on policies and actions required under relevant ESRS, because it
has not adopted policies and/or actions with reference to the specific sustainability matter concerned, it shall
disclose this to be the case, and provide reasons for not having adopted policies and/or actions. The undertaking
may disclose a timeframe in which it aims to adopt them.
Minimum Disclosure Requirement – Policies MDR-P – Policies adopted to manage material sustainability matters
63. The undertaking shall apply the minimum disclosure requirements defined in this provision when it discloses the
policies it has in place with regard to each sustainability matter identified as material.
64. The objective of this Minimum Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of the policies that the
undertaking has in place to prevent, mitigate and remediate actual and potential impacts, to address risks and to
pursue opportunities.
65. The undertaking shall disclose information about policies adopted to manage material sustainability matters. The
disclosure shall include the following information:
(a) a description of the key contents of the policy, including its general objectives and which material impacts, risks
or opportunities the policy relates to and the process for monitoring;
(b) a description of the scope of the policy, or of its exclusions, in terms of activities, upstream and/or downstream
value chain, geographies and if relevant, affected stakeholder groups;
(c) the most senior level in the undertaking’s organisation that is accountable for the implementation of the policy;
(d) a reference, if relevant, to the third-party standards or initiatives the undertaking commits to respect through the
implementation of the policy;
(e) if relevant, a description of the consideration given to the interests of key stakeholders in setting the policy; and
(f) if relevant, whether and how the undertaking makes the policy available to potentially affected stakeholders, and
stakeholders who need to help implement it.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 53/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Minimum Disclosure Requirement – Actions MDR-A – Actions and resources in relation to material sustainability
matters
66. The undertaking shall apply the requirements for the content of disclosures in this provision when it describes the
actions through which it manages each material sustainability matter including action plans and resources
allocated and/or planned.
67. The objective of this Minimum Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of the key actions
taken and/or planned to prevent, mitigate and remediate actual and potential impacts, and to address risks and
opportunities, and where applicable achieve the objectives and targets of related policies.
68. Where the implementation of a policy requires actions, or a comprehensive action plan, to achieve its objectives, as
well as when actions are implemented without a specific policy, the undertaking shall disclose the following
information:
(a) the list of key actions taken in the reporting year and planned for the future, their expected outcomes and, where
relevant, how their implementation contributes to the achievement of policy objectives and targets;
(b) the scope of the key actions (i.e., coverage in terms of activities, upstream and/or downstream value chain,
geographies and, where applicable, affected stakeholder groups);
(c) the time horizons under which the undertaking intends to complete each key action;
(d) if applicable, key actions taken (along with results) to provide for and cooperate in or support the provision of
remedy for those harmed by actual material impacts;
(e) if applicable, quantitative and qualitative information regarding the progress of actions or action plans disclosed
in prior periods.
69. Where the implementation of an action plan requires significant operational expenditures (Opex) and/or capital
expenditures (Capex) the undertaking shall:
(a) describe the type of current and future financial and other resources allocated to the action plan, including if
applicable, the relevant terms of sustainable finance instruments, such as green bonds, social bonds and green
loans, the environmental or social objectives, and whether the ability to implement the actions or action plan
depends on specific preconditions, e.g., granting of financial support or public policy and market developments;
(b) provide the amount of current financial resources and explain how they relate to the most relevant amounts
presented in the financial statements; and
(c) provide the amount of future financial resources.
5. Metrics and targets
70. This chapter sets out Minimum Disclosure Requirements that shall be included when the undertaking discloses
information on its metrics and targets related to each material sustainability matter. They shall be applied together
with the Disclosure Requirements, including Application Requirements, provided in the relevant topical ESRS. They
shall also be applied when the undertaking prepares entity-specific disclosures.
71. The corresponding disclosures shall be located alongside disclosures prescribed by the topical ESRS.
72. If the undertaking cannot disclose the information on targets required under the relevant topical ESRS, because it has
not set targets with reference to the specific sustainability matter concerned, it shall disclose this to be the case, and
provide reasons for not having adopted targets. The undertaking may disclose a timeframe in which it aims to adopt
them.
54/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Minimum disclosure requirement – Metrics MDR-M – Metrics in relation to material sustainability matters
73. The undertaking shall apply the requirements for the content of disclosures in this provision when it discloses on the
metrics it has in place with regard to each material sustainability matter.
74. The objective of this Minimum Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of the metrics the
undertaking uses to track the effectiveness of its actions to manage material sustainability matters.
75. The undertaking shall disclose any metrics that it uses to evaluate performance and effectiveness, in relation to a
material impact, risk or opportunity.
76. Metrics shall include those defined in ESRS, as well as metrics identified on an entity-specific basis, whether taken
from other sources or developed by the undertaking itself.
77. For each metric, the undertaking shall:
(a) disclose the methodologies and significant assumptions behind the metric, including the limitations of the
methodologies used;
(b) disclose whether the measurement of the metric is validated by an external body other than the assurance
provider and, if so, which body;
(c) label and define the metric using meaningful, clear and precise names and descriptions;
(d) when currency is specified as the unit of measure, use the presentation currency of its financial statements.
Minimum Disclosure Requirement – Targets MDR-T – Tracking effectiveness of policies and actions through targets
78. The undertaking shall apply the requirements for the content of disclosures in this provision when it discloses
information about the targets it has set with regard to each material sustainability matter.
79. The objective of this Minimum Disclosure Requirement is to provide for each material sustainability matter an
understanding of:
(a) whether and how the undertaking tracks the effectiveness of its actions to address material impacts, risks and
opportunities, including the metrics it uses to do so;
(b) measurable time-bound outcome-oriented targets set by the undertaking to meet the policy’s objectives, defined
in terms of expected results for people, the environment or the undertaking regarding material impacts, risks and
opportunities;
(c) the overall progress towards the adopted targets over time;
(d) in the case that the undertaking has not set measurable time-bound outcome-oriented targets, whether and how
it nevertheless tracks the effectiveness of its actions to address material impacts, risks and opportunities and
measures the progress in achieving its policy objectives; and
(e) whether and how stakeholders have been involved in target setting for each material sustainability matter.
80. The undertaking shall disclose the measurable, outcome-oriented and time-bound targets on material sustainability
matters it has set to assess progress. For each target, the disclosure shall include the following information:
(a) a description of the relationship of the target to the policy objectives;
(b) the defined target level to be achieved, including, where applicable, whether the target is absolute or relative and
in which unit it is measured;
(c) the scope of the target, including the undertaking’s activities and/or its upstream and/or downstream value chain
where applicable and geographical boundaries;
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 55/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(d) the baseline value and base year from which progress is measured;
(e) the period to which the target applies and if applicable, any milestones or interim targets;
(f) the methodologies and significant assumptions used to define targets, including where applicable, the selected
scenario, data sources, alignment with national, EU or international policy goals and how the targets consider
the wider context of sustainable development and/or local situation in which impacts take place;
(g) whether the undertaking’s targets related to environmental matters are based on conclusive scientific evidence;
(h) whether and how stakeholders have been involved in target setting for each material sustainability matter;
(i) any changes in targets and corresponding metrics or underlying measurement methodologies, significant
assumptions, limitations, sources and processes to collect data adopted within the defined time horizon. This
includes an explanation of the rationale for those changes and their effect on comparability (see Disclosure
Requirement BP-2 Disclosures in relation to specific circumstances of this Standard); and
(j) the performance against its disclosed targets, including information on how the target is monitored and reviewed
and the metrics used, whether the progress is in line with what had been initially planned, and an analysis of
trends or significant changes in the performance of the undertaking towards achieving the target.
81. If the undertaking has not set any measurable outcome-oriented targets:
(a) it may disclose whether such targets will be set and the timeframe for setting them, or the reasons why the
undertaking does not plan to set such targets;
(b) it shall disclose whether it nevertheless tracks the effectiveness of its policies and actions in relation to the
material sustainability-related impact, risk and opportunity, and if so:
i. any processes through which it does so;
ii. the defined level of ambition to be achieved and any qualitative or quantitative indicators it uses to evaluate
progress, including the base period from which progress is measured.
56/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix A
Application Requirements
This appendix is an integral part of ESRS 2 and has the same authority as other parts of the Standard.
1. Basis for preparation
Disclosure Requirement BP-1 – General basis for preparation of sustainability statements
AR 1. When describing to what extent the sustainability statement covers the undertaking’s upstream and downstream
value chain (see ESRS 1 section 5.1 Reporting undertaking and value chain), the undertaking may distinguish between:
(a) the extent to which its materiality assessment of impacts, risks and opportunities extends to its
upstream and/or downstream value chain;
(b) the extent to which its policies, actions and targets extend to its value chain; and
(c) the extent to which it includes upstream and/or downstream value chain data when disclosing on metrics.
Disclosure Requirement BP-2 – Disclosures in relation to specific circumstances
AR 2. The undertaking may disclose whether it relies on any European standards approved by the European
Standardisation System (ISO/IEC or CEN/CENELEC standards), as well as the extent to which data and processes
that are used for sustainability reporting purposes have been verified by an external assurance provider and found
to conform to the corresponding ISO/IEC or CEN/CENELEC standard.
2. Governance
Disclosure Requirement GOV-1 – The role of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies
AR 3. In describing the role and responsibilities of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies with
regard to sustainability matters, the undertaking may specify:
(a) the aspects of sustainability over which oversight is exercised with regard to the environmental, social and
governance matters the undertaking may be facing, including:
i. any assessment of and changes to sustainability-related aspects of the undertaking’s strategy and business
model;
ii. the identification and assessment of material risks, opportunities and impacts;
iii. related policies and targets, action plans and dedicated resources; and
iv. sustainability reporting;
(b) the form such oversight takes for each of the above aspects: i.e., information, consultation or decision-making;
and
(c) the way such oversight is organised and formalised, i.e., processes by which the administrative, management
and supervisory bodies engage with these aspects of sustainability.
AR 4. In describing the undertaking’s organisation of governance regarding sustainability matters, a description of
complex governance structure may be complemented by their presentation in the form of a diagram.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 57/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 5. The description of the level of expertise or access to expertise of the administrative, management and supervisory
bodies may be substantiated by illustrating the composition of the bodies, including members on whom these
bodies rely for expertise to oversee sustainability matters, and how they leverage that expertise as a body. In the
description, the undertaking shall consider how the expertise and skills are relevant to the undertaking’s material
impacts, risks and opportunities and whether the bodies and/or its members have access to other sources of
expertise, such as specific experts and training and other educational initiatives to update and develop
sustainability-related expertise within these bodies.
Disclosure Requirement GOV-2 – Information provided to and sustainability matters addressed by the undertaking’s
administrative, management and supervisory bodies
AR 6. Depending on the undertaking’s structure, the administrative, management and supervisory bodies may focus on
overarching targets, while management focuses on the more detailed targets. In this case, the undertaking may
disclose how the governance bodies ensure that an appropriate mechanism for performance monitoring is in
place.
Disclosure Requirement GOV-3 – Integration of sustainability-related performance in incentive schemes
AR 7. For listed undertakings, this Disclosure Requirement should be consistent with the remuneration report prescribed
in articles 9a and 9b of Directive 2007/36/EC on the exercise of certain rights of shareholders in listed companies.
Subject to the provisions of ESRS 1, paragraphs 119, 120 and 122, a listed undertaking may make a reference to its
remuneration report.
Disclosure Requirement GOV-4 – Statement on due diligence
AR 8. The mapping required by paragraph 30 may be presented in the form of a table, cross-referencing the core
elements of due diligence, for impacts on people and the environment, to the relevant disclosures in the
undertaking’s sustainability statement, as set out below.
AR 9. The undertaking may include additional columns to the table below to clearly identify those disclosures that relate
to impacts on people and/or the environment given that, in some cases, more than one disclosure may provide
information about the same due diligence step.
AR 10. The main references in the international instruments of the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights
and the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises to the core elements of the due diligence process are listed
in ESRS 1 chapter 4.
CORE ELEMENTS OF DUE DILIGENCE PARAGRAPHS IN THE
SUSTAINABILITY STATEMENT
a) Embedding due diligence in governance, strategy and business
model
b) Engaging with affected stakeholders in all key steps of the due
diligence
c) Identifying and assessing adverse impacts
d) Taking actions to address those adverse impacts
e) Tracking the effectiveness of these efforts and communicating
58/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Disclosure Requirement GOV-5 – Risk management and internal controls over sustainability reporting
AR 11. This Disclosure Requirement focuses solely on the internal control processes over the sustainability reporting
process. The undertaking may consider risks such as the completeness and integrity of the data, the accuracy of
estimation results, the availability of upstream and/or downstream value chain data, and the timing of the
availability of the information.
3. Strategy
Disclosure Requirement SBM–1 Strategy, business model and value chain
AR 12. To provide the information on sectors required by paragraph 40, the undertaking shall map its significant activities
in accordance with ESRS sectors. If a code for a sub-sector does not exist, the caption “others” shall be used.
AR 13. For the purposes of the disclosures required in paragraph 40, a group of products and/or services offered, a group
of markets and/or customer groups served, or an ESRS sector, is significant for the undertaking if it meets one or
both of the following criteria:
(a) it accounts for more than 10 per cent of the undertaking’s revenue;
(b) it is connected with material actual impacts or material potential negative impacts of the undertaking.
AR 14. In preparing disclosures relating to its business model and value chain, the undertaking shall consider:
(a) its key activities, resources, distribution channels and customer segments;
(b) its key business relationships and their key characteristics, including relationships with customers and
suppliers;
(c) the cost structure and revenue of its business segments, in line with IFRS 8 disclosure requirements in the
financial statement, where applicable;
(d) the potential impacts, risks and opportunities in its significant sector(s) and their possible relationship to its
own business model or value chain.
AR 15. Contextual information may be particularly relevant for users of the undertaking’s sustainability statement, to
understand to what extent the disclosures include upstream and/or downstream value chain information. The
description of the main features of the upstream and/or downstream value chain and where applicable the
identification of key value chains should support an understanding of how the undertaking applies the
requirements of ESRS 1 chapter 5 and the materiality assessment performed by the undertaking in line with ESRS
1 chapter 3. The description may provide a high-level overview of the key features of upstream and/or downstream
value chain entities indicating their relative contribution to the undertaking’s performance and position and
explaining how they contribute to the value creation of the undertaking.
Disclosure Requirement SBM-2 – Interests and views of stakeholders
AR 16. The views and interests of stakeholders that are expressed as part of the undertaking’s engagement with
stakeholders through its due diligence process may be relevant to one or more aspects of its strategy or business
model. As such, they may affect the undertaking’s decisions regarding the future direction of the strategy or
business model.
Disclosure Requirement SBM-3 – Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and
business model
AR 17. When describing where in its upstream and/or downstream value chain material impacts, risks and opportunities
are concentrated, the undertaking shall consider: geographical areas, facilities or types of assets, inputs, outputs
and distribution channels.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 59/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 18. This disclosure may be expressed in terms of a single impact, risk or opportunity or by aggregating groups of
material impacts, risks and opportunities, when this provides more relevant information and does not obscure
material information.
4. Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure Requirement IRO-2 – Disclosure Requirements in ESRS covered by the undertaking’s sustainability
statement
AR 19. Notwithstanding the basis for the presentation of the information about sustainability matters included in ESRS 1
chapter 8 Structure of sustainability statement, the undertaking may disclose the list of the Disclosure Requirements
complied with in preparing the sustainability statement (see paragraph 54) in the general information part or in
other parts of the sustainability statement as it deems appropriate. The undertaking may use a content index, i.e.,
a tabular list of the Disclosure Requirements included in the sustainability statement, with the indication of where
they are located (page/paragraphs).
Minimum Disclosure Requirement – Policies MDR-P – Policies adopted to manage material sustainability matters
AR 20. Due to the interdependency between impacts on people and the environment, risks and opportunities, a single
policy may apply to several material sustainability matters, including matters addressed by more than one topical
ESRS. For example, if a single policy covers both an environmental matter and a social matter, the undertaking may
report on the policy in the environmental section of its sustainability statement. In this case, it should include in
the social section a cross-reference to the environmental section where the policy is reported. Equally a policy may
be reported in the social section with a cross-reference to it in the environmental section.
AR 21. The description of the scope of the policy may explain which activities and/or segments of the undertaking’s own
operations or upstream and downstream value chain it concerns. The description may also explain further
boundaries relevant to the specific topic or the undertaking’s circumstances, which may include geographies, life
cycles, etc. In certain cases, such as if the policy does not cover the full value chain, the undertaking may provide
clear information regarding the extent of the value chain covered by the policy.
Minimum disclosure requirement – Actions MDR-A – Actions and resources in relation to material sustainability
matters
AR 22. Key actions in the context of this Minimum Disclosure Requirement are those actions that materially contribute
to achieving the undertaking’s objectives in addressing material impacts, risks and opportunities. For reasons of
understandability, key actions may be aggregated where appropriate.
AR 23. Information on resource allocation may be presented in the form of a table and broken down between capital
expenditure and operating expenditure, and across the relevant time horizons, and between resources applied in
the current reporting year and the planned allocation of resources over specific time horizons.
5. Metrics and targets
Minimum Disclosure Requirement – Targets MDR-T – Tracking effectiveness of policies and actions through targets
AR 24. When disclosing targets related to the prevention or mitigation of environmental impacts, the undertaking shall
prioritise targets related to the reduction of the impacts in absolute terms rather than in relative terms. When
targets address the prevention or mitigation of social impacts, they may be specified in terms of the effects on
human rights, welfare or positive outcomes for affected stakeholders.
60/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 25. The information on progress made towards achieving the targets may be presented in a comprehensive table,
including information on the baseline and target value, milestones, and achieved performance over the prior
periods.
AR 26. Where the undertaking describes progress in achieving the objectives of a policy in the absence of a measurable
target, it may specify a baseline against which the progress is considered. For example, the undertaking may assess
an increase of wages by a certain percentage for those below a fair wage; or may assess the quality of its
relationships with local communities by reference to the proportion of issues raised by communities that were
resolved to their satisfaction. The baseline and the assessment of the progress shall be related to the impacts, risks
and opportunities which underpin the materiality of the matter addressed by the policy.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 61/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix B
List of datapoints in cross-cutting and topical standards that derive from other EU legislation
This appendix is an integral part of the ESRS 2. The table below illustrates the datapoints in ESRS 2 and topical ESRS that
derive from other EU legislation.
EU
Disclosure Requirement and Benchmark
SFDR(1)reference Pillar 3(2)reference Climate Law(4)
related datapoint Regulation(3)reference
reference
ESRS 2 GOV-1 Indicator number 13 Commission
Board's gender diversity of Table #1 of Annex Delegated Regulation
paragraph 21 (d) 1 (EU) 2020/1816(5),
Annex II
ESRS 2 GOV-1 Delegated Regulation
Percentage of board members (EU) 2020/1816,
who are independent Annex II
paragraph 21 (e)
ESRS 2 GOV-4 Indicator number 10
Statement on due diligence Table #3 of Annex 1
paragraph 30
ESRS 2 SBM-1 Indicators number 4 Article 449a Delegated Regulation
Involvement in activities Table #1 of Annex 1 Regulation (EU) (EU) 2020/1816,
related to fossil fuel activities No 575/2013; Annex II
paragraph 40 (d) i Commission
Implementing
Regulation
(EU) 2022/2453(6)
Table 1: Qualitative
information on
Environmental risk
and Table 2:
Qualitative
information on Social
risk
ESRS 2 SBM-1 Indicator number 9 Delegated Regulation
Involvement in activities Table #2 of Annex 1 (EU) 2020/1816,
related to chemical Annex II
production paragraph 40 (d)
ii
ESRS 2 SBM-1 Indicator number 14 Delegated Regulation
Involvement in activities Table #1 of Annex 1 (EU) 2020/1818(7),
related to controversial Article 12(1)
weapons paragraph 40 (d) iii Delegated Regulation
(EU) 2020/1816,
Annex II
62/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
EU
Disclosure Requirement and Benchmark
SFDR(1)reference Pillar 3(2)reference Climate Law(4)
related datapoint Regulation(3)reference
reference
ESRS 2 SBM-1 Delegated Regulation
Involvement in activities (EU) 2020/1818,
related to cultivation and Article 12(1)
production of tobacco Delegated Regulation
paragraph 40 (d) iv (EU) 2020/1816,
Annex II
ESRS E1-1 Regulation
Transition plan to reach (EU) 2021/1119,
climate neutrality by 2050 Article 2(1)
paragraph 14
ESRS E1-1 Article 449a Delegated Regulation
Undertakings excluded from Regulation (EU) (EU) 2020/1818,
Paris-aligned Benchmarks No 575/2013; Article12.1 (d) to (g),
paragraph 16 (g) Commission and Article 12.2
Implementing
Regulation
(EU) 2022/2453
Template 1: Banking
book-Climate Change
transition risk: Credit
quality of exposures
by sector, emissions
and residual maturity
ESRS E1-4 Indicator number 4 Article 449a Delegated Regulation
GHG emission reduction Table #2 of Annex 1 Regulation (EU) (EU) 2020/1818,
targets paragraph 34 No 575/2013; Article 6
Commission
Implementing
Regulation
(EU) 2022/2453
Template 3: Banking
book – Climate
change transition risk:
alignment metrics
ESRS E1-5 Indicator number 5
Energy consumption from Table #1 and
fossil sources disaggregated Indicator n. 5 Table
by sources (only high climate #2 of Annex 1
impact sectors) paragraph 38
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 63/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
EU
Disclosure Requirement and Benchmark
SFDR(1)reference Pillar 3(2)reference Climate Law(4)
related datapoint Regulation(3)reference
reference
ESRS E1-5 Energy Indicator number 5
consumption and mix Table #1 of Annex 1
paragraph 37
ESRS E1-5 Indicator number 6
Energy intensity associated Table #1 of Annex 1
with activities in high climate
impact sectors paragraphs 40
to 43
ESRS E1-6 Indicators number 1 Article 449a; Delegated Regulation
Gross Scope 1, 2, 3 and Total and 2 Table #1 of Regulation (EU) (EU) 2020/1818,
GHG emissions paragraph Annex 1 No 575/2013; Article 5(1), 6
44 Commission and 8(1)
Implementing
Regulation
(EU) 2022/2453
Template 1: Banking
book – Climate
change transition risk:
Credit quality of
exposures by sector,
emissions and
residual maturity
ESRS E1-6 Indicators number 3 Article 449a Delegated Regulation
Gross GHG emissions Table #1 of Annex 1 Regulation (EU) (EU) 2020/1818,
intensity paragraphs 53 to 55 No 575/2013; Article 8(1)
Commission
Implementing
Regulation
(EU) 2022/2453
Template 3: Banking
book – Climate
change transition risk:
alignment metrics
ESRS E1-7 Regulation
GHG removals and carbon (EU) 2021/1119,
credits paragraph 56 Article 2(1)
ESRS E1-9 Delegated Regulation
Exposure of the benchmark (EU) 2020/1818,
portfolio to climate-related Annex II Delegated
physical risks paragraph 66 Regulation
(EU) 2020/1816,
Annex II
64/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
EU
Disclosure Requirement and Benchmark
SFDR(1)reference Pillar 3(2)reference Climate Law(4)
related datapoint Regulation(3)reference
reference
ESRS E1-9 Article 449a
Disaggregation of monetary Regulation (EU)
amounts by acute and No 575/2013;
chronic physical risk Commission
paragraph 66 (a) Implementing
ESRS E1-9 Regulation
Location of significant assets (EU) 2022/2453
at material physical risk paragraphs 46
paragraph 66 (c). and 47; Template 5:
Banking book -
Climate change
physical risk:
Exposures subject to
physical risk.
ESRS E1-9 Breakdown of the Article 449a
carrying value of its real estate Regulation (EU)
assets by energy-efficiency No 575/2013;
classes paragraph 67 (c). Commission
Implementing
Regulation
(EU) 2022/2453
paragraph 34;
Template 2:Banking
book -Climate change
transition risk: Loans
collateralised by
immovable property -
Energy efficiency of
the collateral
ESRS E1-9 Delegated Regulation
Degree of exposure of the (EU) 2020/1818,
portfolio to climate- related Annex II
opportunities paragraph 69
ESRS E2-4 Indicator number 8
Amount of each pollutant Table #1 of Annex 1
listed in Annex II of the Indicator number 2
E-PRTR Regulation Table #2 of Annex 1
(European Pollutant Release Indicator number 1
and Transfer Register) Table #2 of Annex 1
emitted to air, water and soil, Indicator number 3
paragraph 28 Table #2 of Annex 1
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 65/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
EU
Disclosure Requirement and Benchmark
SFDR(1)reference Pillar 3(2)reference Climate Law(4)
related datapoint Regulation(3)reference
reference
ESRS E3-1 Indicator number 7
Water and marine resources Table #2 of Annex 1
paragraph 9
ESRS E3-1 Indicator number 8
Dedicated policy paragraph Table 2 of Annex 1
13
ESRS E3-1 Indicator number 12
Sustainable oceans and seas Table #2 of Annex 1
paragraph 14
ESRS E3-4 Indicator number 6.2
Total water recycled and Table #2 of Annex 1
reused paragraph 28 (c)
ESRS E3-4 Indicator number 6.1
Total water consumption in Table #2 of Annex 1
m3 per net revenue on own
operations paragraph 29
ESRS 2- IRO 1 - E4 paragraph Indicator number 7
16 (a) i Table #1 of Annex 1
ESRS 2- IRO 1 - E4 paragraph Indicator number 10
16 (b) Table #2 of Annex 1
ESRS 2- IRO 1 - E4 paragraph Indicator number 14
16 (c) Table #2 of Annex 1
ESRS E4-2 Indicator number 11
Sustainable land / agriculture Table #2 of Annex 1
practices or policies
paragraph 24 (b)
ESRS E4-2 Indicator number 12
Sustainable oceans / seas Table #2 of Annex 1
practices or policies
paragraph 24 (c)
ESRS E4-2 Indicator number 15
Policies to address Table #2 of Annex 1
deforestation paragraph 24
(d)
66/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
EU
Disclosure Requirement and Benchmark
SFDR(1)reference Pillar 3(2)reference Climate Law(4)
related datapoint Regulation(3)reference
reference
ESRS E5-5 Indicator number 13
Non-recycled waste Table #2 of Annex 1
paragraph 37 (d)
ESRS E5-5 Indicator number 9
Hazardous waste and Table #1 of Annex 1
radioactive waste paragraph
39
ESRS 2- SBM3 - S1 Indicator number 13
Risk of incidents of forced Table #3 of Annex I
labour paragraph 14 (f)
ESRS 2- SBM3 - S1 Indicator number 12
Risk of incidents of child Table #3 of Annex I
labour paragraph 14 (g)
ESRS S1-1 Indicator number 9
Human rights policy Table #3 and
commitments paragraph 20 Indicator number 11
Table #1 of Annex I
ESRS S1-1 Delegated Regulation
Due diligence policies on (EU) 2020/1816,
issues addressed by the Annex II
fundamental International
Labor Organisation
Conventions 1 to 8,
paragraph 21
ESRS S1-1 Indicator number 11
processes and measures for Table #3 of Annex I
preventing trafficking in
human beings paragraph 22
ESRS S1-1 Indicator number 1
workplace accident Table #3 of Annex I
prevention policy or
management system
paragraph 23
ESRS S1-3 Indicator number 5
grievance/complaints Table #3 of Annex I
handling mechanisms
paragraph 32 (c)
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 67/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
EU
Disclosure Requirement and Benchmark
SFDR(1)reference Pillar 3(2)reference Climate Law(4)
related datapoint Regulation(3)reference
reference
ESRS S1-14 Indicator number 2 Delegated Regulation
Number of fatalities and Table #3 of Annex I (EU) 2020/1816,
number and rate of work- Annex II
related accidents paragraph
88 (b) and (c)
ESRS S1-14 Indicator number 3
Number of days lost to Table #3 of Annex I
injuries, accidents, fatalities
or illness paragraph 88 (e)
ESRS S1-16 Indicator number 12 Delegated Regulation
Unadjusted gender pay gap Table #1 of Annex I (EU) 2020/1816,
paragraph 97 (a) Annex II
ESRS S1-16 Indicator number 8
Excessive CEO pay ratio Table #3 of Annex I
paragraph 97 (b)
ESRS S1-17 Indicator number 7
Incidents of discrimination Table #3 of Annex I
paragraph 103 (a)
ESRS S1-17 Non-respect of Indicator number 10 Delegated Regulation
UNGPs on Business and Table #1 and (EU) 2020/1816,
Human Rights and OECD Indicator n. 14 Table Annex II Delegated
paragraph 104 (a) #3 of Annex I Regulation
(EU) 2020/1818 Art
12 (1)
ESRS 2- SBM3 – S2 Indicators number 12
Significant risk of child and n. 13 Table #3 of
labour or forced labour in the Annex I
value chain paragraph 11 (b)
ESRS S2-1 Indicator number 9
Human rights policy Table #3 and
commitments paragraph 17 Indicator n. 11 Table
#1 of Annex 1
ESRS S2-1 Policies related to Indicator number 11
value chain workers and n. 4 Table #3 of
paragraph 18 Annex 1
68/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
EU
Disclosure Requirement and Benchmark
SFDR(1)reference Pillar 3(2)reference Climate Law(4)
related datapoint Regulation(3)reference
reference
ESRS S2-1Non-respect of Indicator number 10 Delegated Regulation
UNGPs on Business and Table #1 of Annex 1 (EU) 2020/1816,
Human Rights principles and Annex II Delegated
OECD guidelines paragraph Regulation
19 (EU) 2020/1818, Art
12 (1)
ESRS S2-1 Delegated Regulation
Due diligence policies on (EU) 2020/1816,
issues addressed by the Annex II
fundamental International
Labor Organisation
Conventions 1 to 8,
paragraph 19
ESRS S2-4 Indicator number 14
Human rights issues and Table #3 of Annex 1
incidents connected to its
upstream and downstream
value chain paragraph 36
ESRS S3-1 Indicator number 9
Human rights policy Table #3 of Annex 1
commitments paragraph 16 and Indicator number
11 Table #1 of Annex
1
ESRS S3-1 Indicator number 10 Delegated Regulation
non-respect of UNGPs on Table #1 Annex 1 (EU) 2020/1816,
Business and Human Rights, Annex II Delegated
ILO principles or and OECD Regulation
guidelines paragraph 17 (EU) 2020/1818, Art
12 (1)
ESRS S3-4 Indicator number 14
Human rights issues and Table #3 of Annex 1
incidents paragraph 36
ESRS S4-1 Policies related to Indicator number 9
consumers and end-users Table #3 and
paragraph 16 Indicator number 11
Table #1 of Annex 1
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 69/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
EU
Disclosure Requirement and Benchmark
SFDR(1)reference Pillar 3(2)reference Climate Law(4)
related datapoint Regulation(3)reference
reference
ESRS S4-1 Indicator number 10 Delegated Regulation
Non-respect of UNGPs on Table #1 of Annex 1 (EU) 2020/1816,
Business and Human Rights Annex II Delegated
and OECD guidelines Regulation
paragraph 17 (EU) 2020/1818, Art
12 (1)
ESRS S4-4 Indicator number 14
Human rights issues and Table #3 of Annex 1
incidents paragraph 35
ESRS G1-1 Indicator number 15
United Nations Convention Table #3 of Annex 1
against Corruption
paragraph 10 (b)
ESRS G1-1 Indicator number 6
Protection of whistle- Table #3 of Annex 1
blowers paragraph 10 (d)
ESRS G1-4 Indicator number 17 Delegated Regulation
Fines for violation of anti- Table #3 of Annex 1 (EU) 2020/1816,
corruption and anti-bribery Annex II)
laws paragraph 24 (a)
ESRS G1-4 Indicator number 16
Standards of anti- corruption Table #3 of Annex 1
and anti- bribery paragraph
24 (b)
(1) Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 November 2019on sustainability-related disclosures
in the financial services sector (Sustainable Finance Disclosures Regulation) (OJ L 317, 9.12.2019, p. 1).
(2) Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013on prudential requirements for credit
institutions and investment firms and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 (Capital Requirements Regulation “CRR”) (OJ L 176,
27.6.2013, p. 1).
(3) Regulation (EU) 2016/1011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2016on indices used as benchmarks in financial
instruments and financial contracts or to measure the performance of investment funds and amending Directives 2008/48/EC
and 2014/17/EU and Regulation (EU) No 596/2014 (OJ L 171, 29.6.2016, p. 1).
(4) Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 June 2021establishing the framework for achieving
climate neutrality and amending Regulations (EC) No 401/2009 and (EU) 2018/1999 (‘European Climate Law’) (OJ L 243, 9.7.2021,
p. 1).
(5) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1816 of 17 July 2020 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1011 of the European
Parliament and of the Council as regards the explanation in the benchmark statement of how environmental, social and governance
factors are reflected in each benchmark provided and published (OJ L 406, 3.12.2020, p. 1).
(6) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2453 of 30 November 2022amending the implementing technical standards laid
down in Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/637 as regards the disclosure of environmental, social and governance risks
(OJ L 324,19.12.2022, p.1.).
(7) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1818 of 17 July 2020 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1011 of the European
Parliament and of the Council as regards minimum standards for EU Climate Transition Benchmarks and EU Paris-aligned Benchmarks
(OJ L 406, 3.12.2020, p. 17).
70/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix C
Disclosure and Application Requirements in Topical ESRS that are applicable in conjunction with
ESRS 2 General disclosures
This appendix is an integral part of ESRS 2 and has the same authority as the other parts of the standard. The following
table outlines the requirements in topical ESRS that need to be taken into account when reporting against the Disclosure
Requirements in ESRS 2.
ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement Related ESRS paragraph
GOV–1 The role of the administrative, management and ESRS G1 Business conduct (paragraph 5)
supervisory bodies
GOV–3 Integration of sustainability-related ESRS E1 Climate change (paragraph 13)
performance in incentive schemes
SBM–2 Interests and views of stakeholders ESRS S1 Own workforce (paragraph 12)
ESRS S2 Workers in the value chain (paragraph 9)
ESRS S3 Affected communities (paragraph 7)
ESRS S4 Consumers and end-users (paragraph 8)
SBM–3 Material impacts, risks and opportunities and ESRS E1 Climate Change (paragraphs 18 to 19)
their interaction with strategy and business model
ESRS E4 Biodiversity and ecosystems (paragraph 16)
ESRS S1 Own workforce (paragraph 13 to 16)
ESRS S2 Workers in the value chain (paragraph 10 to 13)
ESRS S3 Affected communities (paragraph 8 to 11)
ESRS S4 Consumers and end-users (paragraph 9 to 12)
IRO-1 Description of the processes to identify and ESRS E1 Climate change (paragraph 20 to 21)
assess material impacts, risks and opportunities
ESRS E2 Pollution (paragraph 11)
ESRS E3 Water and marine resources (paragraph 8)
ESRS E4 Biodiversity and ecosystems (paragraph 17 to 19)
ESRS E5 Resource use and circular economy (paragraph 11)
ESRS G1 Business conduct (paragraph 6)
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 71/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
ESRS E1
CLIMATE CHANGE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Objective
Interactions with other ESRS
Disclosure Requirements
– ESRS 2 General disclosures
Governance
— Disclosure requirement related to ESRS 2 GOV-3 Integration of sustainability-related performance in incentive
schemes
Strategy
— Disclosure Requirement E1-1 – Transition plan for climate change mitigation
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 – Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction
with strategy and business model
Impact, risk and opportunity management
— Disclosure requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify and assess material
climate-related impacts, risks and opportunities
— Disclosure Requirement E1-2 – Policies related to climate change mitigation and adaptation
— Disclosure Requirement E1-3 – Actions and resources in relation to climate change policies
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement E1-4 – Targets related to climate change mitigation and adaptation
— Disclosure Requirement E1-5 – Energy consumption and mix
— Disclosure Requirement E1-6 – Gross Scopes 1, 2, 3 and Total GHG emissions
— Disclosure Requirement E1-7 – GHG removals and GHG mitigation projects financed through carbon credits
— Disclosure Requirement E1-8 – Internal carbon pricing
— Disclosure Requirement E1-9 – Anticipated financial effects from material physical and transition risks and
potential climate-related opportunities
Appendix A: Application Requirements
– ESRS 2 General disclosures
Strategy
— Disclosure Requirement E1-1 – Transition plan for climate change mitigation
Impact, risk and opportunity management
— Disclosure Requirement E1-2 – Policies related to climate change mitigation and adaptation
— Disclosure Requirements E1-3 – Actions and resources in relation to climate change policies
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement E1-4 – Targets related to climate change mitigation and adaptation
— Disclosure Requirement E1-5 – Energy consumption and mix
— Disclosure Requirements E1-6 – Gross Scopes 1, 2, 3 and Total GHG emissions
— Disclosure Requirement E1-7 – GHG removals and GHG mitigation projects financed through carbon credits
72/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
— Disclosure Requirement E1-8 – Internal carbon pricing
— Disclosure Requirement E1-9 – Anticipated financial effects from material physical and transition risks and
potential climate-related opportunities
Objective
1. The objective of this Standard is to specify Disclosure Requirements which will enable users of sustainability
statements to understand:
(a) how the undertaking affects climate change, in terms of material positive and negative actual and potential
impacts;
(b) the undertaking’s past, current, and future mitigation efforts in line with the Paris Agreement (or an updated
international agreement on climate change) and compatible with limiting global warming to 1.5°C;
(c) the plans and capacity of the undertaking to adapt its strategy and business model, in line with the transition to a
sustainable economy and to contribute to limiting global warming to 1.5°C;
(d) any other actions taken by the undertaking, and the result of such actions to prevent, mitigate or remediate actual
or potential negative impacts, and to address risks and opportunities;
(e) the nature, type and extent of the undertaking’s material risks and opportunities arising from the undertaking’s
impacts and dependencies on climate change, and how the undertaking manages them; and
(f) the financial effects on the undertaking over the short-, medium- and long-term of risks and opportunities
arising from the undertaking’s impacts and dependencies on climate change.
2. The Disclosure Requirements of this Standard take into account the requirements of related EU legislation and
regulation (i.e., EU Climate Law(23), Climate Benchmark Standards Regulation(24), Sustainable Finance Disclosure
Regulation (SFDR)(25), EU Taxonomy(26), and EBA Pillar 3 disclosure requirements(27)).
3. This Standard covers Disclosure Requirements related to the following sustainability matters: “Climate change
mitigation” and “Climate change adaptation”. It also covers energy-related matters, to the extent that they are
relevant to climate change.
4. Climate change mitigation relates to the undertaking’s endeavours to the general process of limiting the increase in
the global average temperature to 1,5 °C above pre-industrial levels in line with the Paris Agreement. This Standard
covers disclosure requirements related but not limited to the seven Greenhouse gases (GHG) carbon dioxide (CO2),
methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), sulphur hexafluoride
(SF6) and nitrogen trifluoride (NF3). It also covers Disclosure Requirements on how the undertaking addresses its
GHG emissions as well as the associated transition risks.
(23) Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 June 2021 establishing the framework for achieving
climate neutrality and amending Regulations (EC) No 401/2009 and (EU) 2018/1999 (‘European Climate Law’) (OJ L 243, 9.7.2021,
p. 1).
(24) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1818 of 17 July 2020 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1011 of the European
Parliament and of the Council as regards minimum standards for EU Climate Transition Benchmarks and EU Paris-aligned
Benchmarks (OJ L 406, 3.12.2020, p. 17).
(25) Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 November 2019 on sustainability-related
disclosures in the financial services sector (Sustainable Finance Disclosures Regulation) (OJ L 317, 9.12.2019, p. 1).
(26) Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2020 on the establishment of a framework to
facilitate sustainable investment, and amending Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 (OJ L 198, 22.6.2020, p. 13).
(27) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2453 of 30 November 2022 amending the implementing technical standards laid
down in Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/637 as regards the disclosure of environmental, social and governance risks
(OJ L 324,19.12.2022, p.1.).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 73/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
5. Climate change adaptation relates to the undertaking’s process of adjustment to actual and expected climate change.
6. This Standard covers Disclosure Requirements regarding climate-related hazards that can lead to physical climate
risks for the undertaking and its adaptation solutions to reduce these risks. It also covers transition risks arising
from the needed adaptation to climate- related hazards.
7. The Disclosure Requirements related to “Energy” cover all types of energy production and consumption.
Interactions with other ESRS
8. Ozone-depleting substances (ODS), nitrogen oxides (NOX) and sulphur oxides (SOX), among other air emissions, are
connected to climate change but are covered under the reporting requirements in ESRS E2.
9. Impacts on people that may arise from the transition to a climate-neutral economy are covered under the ESRS S1
Own workforce, ESRS S2 Workers in the value chain, ESRS S3 Affected communities and ESRS S4 Consumers and
end-users.
10. Climate change mitigation and adaptation are closely related to topics addressed in particular in ESRS E3 Water and
marine resources and ESRS E4 Biodiversity and ecosystems. With regard to water and as illustrated in the table of climate-
related hazards in AR 11, this standard addresses acute and chronic physical risks which arise from the water and
ocean-related hazards. Biodiversity loss and ecosystem degradation that may be caused by climate change are
addressed in ESRS E4 Biodiversity and ecosystems.
11. This Standard should be read and applied in conjunction with ESRS 1 General requirements and ESRS 2 General
disclosures.
Disclosure Requirements
ESRS 2 General disclosures
12. The requirements of this section should be read and applied in conjunction with the disclosures required by ESRS 2
on Chapter 2 Governance, Chapter 3 Strategy and Chapter 4 Impact, risk and opportunity management. The resulting
disclosures shall be presented in the sustainability statement alongside the disclosures required by ESRS 2, except
for ESRS 2 SBM-3 Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and business model, for which
the undertaking may, in accordance with ESRS2 paragraph 46, present the disclosures alongside the other disclosures
required in this topical standard.
Governance
Disclosure requirement related to ESRS 2 GOV-3 Integration of sustainability-related performance in incentive schemes
13. The undertaking shall disclose whether and how climate-related considerations are factored into the remuneration of
members of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies, including if their performance has been
assessed against the GHG emission reduction targets reported under Disclosure Requirement E1-4 and the
percentage of the remuneration recognised in the current period that is linked to climate related considerations, with
an explanation of what the climate considerations are.
74/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Strategy
Disclosure Requirement E1-1 – Transition plan for climate change mitigation
14. The undertaking shall disclose its transition plan for climate change mitigation(28).
15. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the undertaking’s past, current, and
future mitigation efforts to ensure that its strategy and business model are compatible with the transition to a
sustainable economy, and with the limiting of global warming to 1.5 °C in line with the Paris Agreement and with
the objective of achieving climate neutrality by 2050 and, where relevant, the undertaking’s exposure to coal, oil and
gas-related activities.
16. The information required by paragraph 14 shall include:
(a) by reference to GHG emission reduction targets (as required by Disclosure Requirement E1-4), an explanation of
how the undertaking’s targets are compatible with the limiting of global warming to 1.5°C in line with the Paris
Agreement;
(b) by reference to GHG emission reduction targets (as required by Disclosure Requirement E1-4) and the climate
change mitigation actions (as required by Disclosure Requirement E1-3), an explanation of the decarbonisation
levers identified, and key actions planned, including changes in the undertaking’s product and service portfolio
and the adoption of new technologies in its own operations, or the upstream and/or downstream value chain;
(c) by reference to the climate change mitigation actions (as required by Disclosure Requirement E1-3), an
explanation and quantification of the undertaking’s investments and funding supporting the implementation of
its transition plan, with a reference to the key performance indicators of taxonomy-aligned CapEx, and where
relevant the CapEx plans, that the undertaking discloses in accordance with Commission Delegated Regulation
(EU) 2021/2178;
(d) a qualitative assessment of the potential locked-in GHG emissions from the undertaking’s key assets and
products. This shall include an explanation of if and how these emissions may jeopardise the achievement of the
undertaking’s GHG emission reduction targets and drive transition risk, and if applicable, an explanation of the
undertaking’s plans to manage its GHG-intensive and energy-intensive assets and products;
(e) for undertakings with economic activities that are covered by delegated regulations on climate adaptation or
mitigation under the Taxonomy Regulation, an explanation of any objective or plans (CapEX, CapEx plans,
OpEX) that the undertaking has for aligning its economic activities (revenues, CapEx, OpEx) with the criteria
established in Commission Delegated Regulation 2021/2139(29);
(f) if applicable, a disclosure of significant CapEx amounts invested during the reporting period related to coal, oil
and gas-related economic activities;(30)
(28) This information is aligned with the Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council (EU Climate Law),
Article 2 (1); and with Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1818 (Climate Benchmark Regulation), Article 2.
(29) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2139 of 4 June 2021 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European
Parliament and of the Council by establishing the technical screening criteria for determining the conditions under which an
economic activity qualifies as contributing substantially to climate change mitigation or climate change adaptation and for
determining whether that economic activity causes no significant harm to any of the other environmental objectives (OJ L 442,
9.12.2021, p. 1).
(30) The CapEx amounts considered are related to the following NACE codes:
(a) B.05 Mining of coal and lignite, B.06 Extraction of crude petroleum and natural gas (limited to crude petroleum), B.09.1 Support
activities for petroleum and natural gas extraction (limited to crude petroleum),
(b) C.19 Manufacture of coke and refined petroleum products,
(c) D.35.1 - Electric power generation, transmission and distribution,
(d) D.35.3 - Steam and air conditioning supply (limited to coal-fired and oil-fired power and/or heat generation),
(e) G.46.71 - Wholesale of solid, liquid and gaseous fuels and related products (limited to solid and liquid fuels).
For gas-related activities, the NACE code definition addresses activities with direct GHG emissions that are higher than
270 gCO2/KWh.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 75/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(g) a disclosure on whether or not the undertaking is excluded from the EU Paris-aligned Benchmarks;(31)
(h) an explanation of how the transition plan is embedded in and aligned with the undertaking’s overall business
strategy and financial planning;
(i) whether the transition plan is approved by the administrative, management and supervisory bodies; and
(j) an explanation of the undertaking’s progress in implementing the transition plan.
17. In case the undertaking does not have a transition plan in place, it shall indicate whether and, if so, when it will adopt
a transition plan.
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 – Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction
with strategy and business model
18. The undertaking shall explain for each material climate-related risk it has identified, whether the entity considers the
risk to be a climate-related physical risk or climate-related transition risk.
19. The undertaking shall describe the resilience of its strategy and business model in relation to climate change. This
description shall include:
(a) the scope of the resilience analysis;
(b) how and when the resilience analysis has been conducted, including the use of climate scenario analysis as
referenced in the Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 and the related application requirement
paragraphs; and
(c) the results of the resilience analysis including the results from the use of scenario analysis.
Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify and assess material climate-
related impacts, risks and opportunities
20. The undertaking shall describe the process to identify and assess climate-related impacts, risks and opportunities.
This description shall include its process in relation to:
(a) impacts on climate change, in particular, the undertaking’s GHG emissions (as required by Disclosure
Requirement ESRS E1-6);
(b) climate-related physical risks in own operations and along the upstream and downstream value chain, in
particular:
i. the identification of climate-related hazards, considering at least high emission climate scenarios; and
ii. the assessment of how its assets and business activities may be exposed and are sensitive to these climate-
related hazards, creating gross physical risks for the undertaking.
(c) climate-related transition risks and opportunities in own operations and along the upstream and downstream
value chain, in particular:
i. the identification of climate-related transition events, considering at least a climate scenario in line with
limiting global warming to 1.5°C with no or limited overshoot; and
ii. the assessment of how its assets and business activities may be exposed to these climate-related transition
events, creating gross transition risks or opportunities for the undertaking.
(31) This disclosure requirement is included consistent with the requirements in Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2453
template I climate change transition risk; and is aligned with Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1818 (Climate Benchmark
Regulation), Articles 12.1 (d) to (g) and 12.2.
76/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
21. When disclosing the information required under paragraphs 20 (b)and 20 (c) the undertaking shall explain how it has
used climate-related scenario analysis, including a range of climate scenarios, to inform the identification and
assessment of physical risks and transition risks and opportunities over the short-, medium- and long-term.
Disclosure Requirement E1-2 – Policies related to climate change mitigation and adaptation
22. The undertaking shall describe its policies adopted to manage its material impacts, risks and opportunities
related to climate change mitigation and adaptation.
23. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the extent to which the undertaking
has policies that address the identification, assessment, management and/or remediation of its material climate
change mitigation and adaptation impacts, risks and opportunities.
24. The disclosure required by paragraph 22 shall contain the information on the policies the undertaking has in place to
manage its material impacts, risks and opportunities related to climate change mitigation and adaptation in
accordance with ESRS 2 MDR-P Policies adopted to manage material sustainability matters.
25. The undertaking shall indicate whether and how its policies address the following areas:
(a) climate change mitigation;
(b) climate change adaptation;
(c) energy efficiency;
(d) renewable energy deployment; and
(e) other
Disclosure Requirement E1-3 – Actions and resources in relation to climate change policies
26. The undertaking shall disclose its climate change mitigation and adaptation actions and the resources
allocated for their implementation.
27. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of the key actions taken and planned to
achieve climate-related policy objectives and targets.
28. The description of the actions and resources related to climate change mitigation and adaptation shall follow the
principles stated in ESRS 2 MDR-A Actions and resources in relation to material sustainability matters.
29. In addition to ESRS 2 MDR-A, the undertaking shall:
(a) when listing key actions taken in the reporting year and planned for the future, present the climate change
mitigation actions by decarbonisation lever including the nature- based solutions;
(b) when describing the outcome of the actions for climate change mitigation, include the achieved and expected
GHG emission reductions; and
(c) relate significant monetary amounts of CapEx and OpEx required to implement the actions taken or planned to:
i. the relevant line items or notes in the financial statements;
ii. the key performance indicators required under Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2178; and
iii. if applicable, the CapEx plan required by Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2178.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 77/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement E1-4 – Targets related to climate change mitigation and adaptation
30. The undertaking shall disclose the climate-related targets it has set.
31. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the targets the undertaking has set to
support its climate change mitigation and adaptation policies and address its material climate-related impacts, risks
and opportunities.
32. The disclosure of the targets required in paragraph 30 shall contain the information required in ESRS 2 MDR-T
Tracking effectiveness of policies and actions through targets.
33. For the disclosure required by paragraph 30, the undertaking shall disclose whether and how it has set GHG
emissions reduction targets and/or any other targets to manage material climate-related impacts, risks and
opportunities, for example, renewable energy deployment, energy efficiency, climate change adaptation, and
physical or transition risk mitigation.
34. If the undertaking has set GHG emission reduction targets(32), ESRS 2 MDR-T and the following requirements shall
apply:
(a) GHG emission reduction targets shall be disclosed in absolute value (either in tonnes of CO2eq or as a percentage
of the emissions of a base year) and, where relevant, in intensity value;
(b) GHG emission reduction targets shall be disclosed for Scope 1, 2, and 3 GHG emissions, either separately or
combined. The undertaking shall specify, in case of combined GHG emission reduction targets, which GHG
emission Scopes (1, 2 and/or 3) are covered by the target, the share related to each respective GHG emission
Scope and which GHGs are covered. The undertaking shall explain how the consistency of these targets with its
GHG inventory boundaries is ensured (as required by Disclosure Requirement E1-6). The GHG emission
reduction targets shall be gross targets, meaning that the undertaking shall not include GHG removals, carbon
credits or avoided emissions as a means of achieving the GHG emission reduction targets;
(c) the undertaking shall disclose its current base year and baseline value, and from 2030 onwards, update the base
year for its GHG emission reduction targets after every five-year period thereafter. The undertaking may disclose
the past progress made in meeting its targets before its current base year provided that this information is
consistent with the requirements of this Standard;
(d) GHG emission reduction targets shall at least include target values for the year 2030 and, if available, for the year
2050. From 2030, target values shall be set after every 5-year period thereafter;
(e) the undertaking shall state whether the GHG emission reduction targets are science- based and compatible with
limiting global warming to 1.5°C. The undertaking shall state which framework and methodology has been used
to determine these targets including whether they are derived using a sectoral decarbonisation pathway and what
the underlying climate and policy scenarios are and whether the targets have been externally assured. As part of
the critical assumptions for setting GHG emission reduction targets, the undertaking shall briefly explain how it
has considered future developments (e.g., changes in sales volumes, shifts in customer preferences and demand,
regulatory factors, and new technologies) and how these will potentially impact both its GHG emissions and
emissions reductions; and
(f) the undertaking shall describe the expected decarbonisation levers and their overall quantitative contributions to
achieve the GHG emission reduction targets (e.g., energy or material efficiency and consumption reduction, fuel
switching, use of renewable energy, phase out or substitution of product and process).
(32) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 (SFDR)
because it is derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #4 in Table II of Annex I
of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Investments in
companies without carbon emission reduction initiatives”); and is aligned with the Commission Delegated Regulation
(EU) 2020/1818 (Climate Benchmark Regulation), Article 6.
78/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Disclosure Requirement E1-5 – Energy consumption and mix
35. The undertaking shall provide information on its energy consumption and mix.
36. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of the undertaking’s total energy
consumption in absolute value, improvement in energy efficiency, exposure to coal, oil and gas-related activities, and
the share of renewable energy in its overall energy mix.
37. The disclosure required by paragraph 35 shall include the total energy consumption in MWh related to own
operations disaggregated by:
(a) total energy consumption from fossil sources(33);
(b) total energy consumption from nuclear sources;
(c) total energy consumption from renewable sources disaggregated by:
i. fuel consumption for renewable sources including biomass (also comprising industrial and municipal waste
of biologic origin), biofuels, biogas, hydrogen from renewable sources(34), etc.;
ii. consumption of purchased or acquired electricity, heat, steam, and cooling from renewable sources; and
iii. consumption of self-generated non-fuel renewable energy.
38. The undertaking with operations in high climate impact sectors(35) shall further disaggregate their total energy
consumption from fossil sources by:
(a) fuel consumption from coal and coal products;
(b) fuel consumption from crude oil and petroleum products;
(c) fuel consumption from natural gas;
(d) fuel consumption from other fossil sources;
(e) consumption of purchased or acquired electricity, heat, steam, or cooling from fossil sources;
39. In addition, where applicable, the undertaking shall disaggregate and disclose separately its non-renewable energy
production and renewable energy production in MWh.(36)
(33) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from a mandatory indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #5 in Table I of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Share of non-
renewable energy consumption and production”). The breakdown serves as a reference for an additional indicator related to principal
adverse impacts as set out by indicator #5 in Table II of the same Annex (“Breakdown of energy consumption by type of non-
renewable sources of energy”).
(34) Compliant with the requirements in delegated acts for hydrogen from renewable sources: Commission Delegated Regulation of
10 February 2023 supplementing Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council by establishing a Union
methodology setting out detailed rules for the production of renewable liquid and gaseous transport fuels of non-biological origin;
and Commission Delegated Regulation of 10 February 2023 supplementing Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament
and of the Council by establishing a minimum threshold for greenhouse gas emissions savings of recycled carbon fuels and by
specifying a methodology for assessing greenhouse gas emissions savings from renewable liquid and gaseous transport fuels of non-
biological origin and from recycled carbon fuel.
(35) High climate impact sectors are those listed in NACE Sections A to H and Section L (as defined in Commission Delegated Regulation
(EU) 2022/1288).
(36) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from a mandatory indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #5 in Table I of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Share of non-
renewable energy consumption and production”).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 79/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Energy intensity based on net revenue(37)
40. The undertaking shall provide information on the energy intensity (total energy consumption per net revenue)
associated with activities in high climate impact sectors.
41. The disclosure on energy intensity required by paragraph 40 shall only be derived from the total energy consumption
and net revenue from activities in high climate impact sectors.
42. The undertaking shall specify the high climate impact sectors that are used to determine the energy intensity
required by paragraph 40.
43. The undertaking shall disclose the reconciliation to the relevant line item or notes in the financial statements of the
net revenue amount from activities in high climate impact sectors (the denominator in the calculation of the energy
intensity required by paragraph 40).
Disclosure Requirement E1-6 – Gross Scopes 1, 2, 3 and Total GHG emissions
44. The undertaking shall disclose in metric tonnes of CO2eq its(38):
(a) gross Scope 1 GHG emissions;
(b) gross Scope 2 GHG emissions;
(c) gross Scope 3 GHG emissions; and
(d) total GHG emissions.
45. The objective of the Disclosure Requirement in paragraph 44 in respect of:
(a) gross Scope 1 GHG emissions as required by paragraph 44 (a) is to provide an understanding of the direct
impacts of the undertaking on climate change and the proportion of its total GHG emissions that are regulated
under emission trading schemes.
(b) gross Scope 2 GHG emissions as required by paragraph 44 (b) is to provide an understanding of the indirect
impacts on climate change caused by the undertaking’s consumed energy whether externally purchased or
acquired.
(c) gross Scope 3 GHG emissions as required by paragraph 44 (c) is to provide an understanding of the GHG
emissions that occur in the undertaking’s upstream and downstream value chain beyond its Scope 1 and 2 GHG
emissions. For many undertakings, Scope 3 GHG emissions may be the main component of their GHG inventory
and are an important driver of the undertaking’s transition risks.
(d) total GHG emissions as required by paragraph 44 (d) is to provide an overall understanding of the undertaking’s
GHG emissions and whether they occur from its own operations or the usptream and donwstream value chain.
This disclosure is a prerequisite for measuring progress towards reducing GHG emissions in accordance with the
undertaking’s climate-related targets and EU policy goals.
The information from this Disclosure Requirement is also needed to understand the undertaking’s climate-related
transition risks.
(37) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from a mandatory indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #6 in Table I of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Energy consumption
intensity per high climate impact sector”).
(38) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from a mandatory indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicators #1 and #2 in Table I of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“GHG emissions” and
“Carbon footprint”). This information is aligned with Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1818 (Climate Benchmark
Regulation), Articles 5 (1), 6 and 8 (1).
80/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
46. When disclosing the information on GHG emissions required under paragraph 44, the undertaking shall refer to
ESRS 1 paragraphs from 62 to 67. In principle, the data on GHG emissions of its associates or joint ventures that are
part of the undertaking’s upstream and downstream value chain (ESRS 1 Paragraph 67) are not limited to the share of
equity held. For its associates, joint ventures, unconsolidated subsidiaries (investment entities) and contractual
arrangements that are joint arrangements not structured through an entity (i.e., jointly controlled operations and
assets), the undertaking shall include the GHG emissions in accordance with the extent of the undertaking’s
operational control over them.
47. In case of significant changes in the definition of what constitutes the reporting undertaking and its upstream and
downstream value chain, the undertaking shall disclose these changes and explain their effect on the year-to-year
comparability of its reported GHG emissions (i.e., the effect on the comparability of current versus previous
reporting period GHG emissions).
48. The disclosure on gross Scope 1 GHG emissions required by paragraph 44 (a) shall include:
(a) the gross Scope 1 GHG emissions in metric tonnes of CO2eq; and
(b) the percentage of Scope 1 GHG emissions from regulated emission trading schemes.
49. The disclosure on gross Scope 2 GHG emissions required by paragraph 44 (b) shall include:
(a) the gross location-based Scope 2 GHG emissions in metric tonnes of CO2eq; and
(b) the gross market-based Scope 2 GHG emissions in metric tonnes of CO2eq.
50. For Scope 1 and Scope 2 emissions disclosed as required by paragraphs 44 (a) and (b) the undertaking shall
disaggregate the information, separately disclosing emissions from:
(a) the consolidated accounting group (the parent and subsidiaries); and
(b) investees such as associates, joint ventures, or unconsolidated subsidiaries that are not fully consolidated in the
financial statements of the consolidated accounting group, as well as contractual arrangements that are joint
arrangements not structured through an entity (i.e., jointly controlled operations and assets), for which it has
operational control.
51. The disclosure of gross Scope 3 GHG emissions required by paragraph 44 (c) shall include GHG emissions in metric
tonnes of CO2eq from each significant Scope 3 category (i.e. each Scope 3 category that is a priority for the
undertaking) .
52. The disclosure of total GHG emissions required by paragraph 44 (d) shall be the sum of Scope 1, 2 and 3 GHG
emissions required by paragraphs 44 (a) to (c). The total GHG emissions shall be disclosed with a disaggregation that
makes a distinction of:
(a) the total GHG emissions derived from the underlying Scope 2 GHG emissions being measured using the
location-based method; and
(b) the total GHG emissions derived from the underlying Scope 2 GHG emissions being measured using the market-
based method.
GHG Intensity based on net revenue(39)
53. The undertaking shall disclose its GHG emissions intensity (total GHG emissions per net revenue).
(39) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from a mandatory indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #3 in Table I of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“GHG intensity of
investee companies”). This information is aligned with Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1818 (Climate Benchmark
Regulation), Article 8 (1).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 81/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
54. The disclosure on GHG intensity required by paragraph 53 shall provide the total GHG emissions in metric tonnes of
CO2eq (required by paragraph 44 (d)) per net revenue.
55. The undertaking shall disclose the reconciliation to the relevant line item or notes in the financial statements of the
net revenue amounts (the denominator in the calculation of the GHG emissions intensity required by paragraph 53).
Disclosure Requirement E1-7 – GHG removals and GHG mitigation projects financed through carbon credits
56. The undertaking shall disclose:
(a) GHG removals and storage in metric tonnes of CO2eq resulting from projects it may have developed in
its own operations, or contributed to in its upstream and downstream value chain; and
(b) the amount of GHG emission reductions or removals from climate change mitigation projects outside
its value chain it has financed or intends to finance through any purchase of carbon credits.
57. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is:
(a) to provide an understanding of the undertaking’s actions to permanently remove or actively support the removal
of GHG from the atmosphere, potentially for achieving net-zero targets (as stated in paragraph 60).
(b) to provide an understanding of the extent and quality of carbon credits the undertaking has purchased or intends
to purchase from the voluntary market, potentially for supporting its GHG neutrality claims (as stated in
paragraph 61).
58. The disclosure on GHG removals and storage required by paragraph 56 (a) shall include, if applicable:
(a) the total amount of GHG removals and storage in metric tonnes of CO2eq disaggregated and separately disclosed
for the amount related to the undertaking’s own operations and its upstream and donwstream value chain, and
broken down by removal activity; and
(b) the calculation assumptions, methodologies and frameworks applied by the undertaking.
59. The disclosure on carbon credits required by paragraph 56 (b) shall include, if applicable:
(a) the total amount of carbon credits outside the undertaking’s value chain in metric tonnes of CO2eq that are
verified against recognised quality standards and cancelled in the reporting period; and
(b) the total amount of carbon credits outside the undertaking’s value chain in metric tonnes of CO2eq planned to be
cancelled in the future and whether they are based on existing contractual agreements or not.
60. In the case where the undertaking discloses a net-zero target in addition to the gross GHG emission reduction
targets in accordance with Disclosure Requirement E1-4, paragraph 30, it shall explain the scope, methodologies
and frameworks applied and how the residual GHG emissions (after approximately 90-95% of GHG emission
reduction with the possibility for justified sectoral variations in line with a recognised sectoral decarbonisation
pathway) are intended to be neutralised by, for example, GHG removals in its own operations and upstream and
donwstream value chain.
61. In the case where the undertaking may have made public claims of GHG neutrality that involve the use of carbon
credits, it shall explain:
(a) whether and how these claims are accompanied by GHG emission reduction targets as required by Disclosure
requirement ESRS E1-4;
82/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) whether and how these claims and the reliance on carbon credits neither impede nor reduce the achievement of
its GHG emission reduction targets(40), or, if applicable, its net zero target; and
(c) the credibility and integrity of the carbon credits used, including by reference to recognised quality standards.
Disclosure Requirement E1-8 – Internal carbon pricing
62. The undertaking shall disclose whether it applies internal carbon pricing schemes, and if so, how they
support its decision making and incentivise the implementation of climate-related policies and targets.
63. The information required in paragraph 62 shall include:
(a) the type of internal carbon pricing scheme, for example, the shadow prices applied for CapEX or research and
development (R&D) investment decision making, internal carbon fees or internal carbon funds;
(b) the specific scope of application of the carbon pricing schemes (activities, geographies, entities, etc.);
(c) the carbon prices applied according to the type of scheme and critical assumptions made to determine the prices,
including the source of the applied carbon prices and why these are deemed relevant for their chosen application.
The undertaking may disclose the calculation methodology of the carbon prices including the extent to which
these have been set using scientific guidance and how their future development is related to science-based
carbon pricing trajectories; and
(d) the current year approximate gross GHG emission volumes by Scopes 1, 2 and, where applicable, Scope 3 in
metric tonnes of CO2eq covered by these schemes, as well as their share of the undertaking’s overall GHG
emissions for each respective Scope.
Disclosure Requirement E1-9 – Anticipated financial effects from material physical and transition risks and potential
climate-related opportunities
64. The undertaking shall disclose its:
(a) anticipated financial effects from material physical risks;
(b) anticipated financial effects from material transition risks; and
(c) potential to benefit from material climate-related opportunities.
65. The information required by paragraph 64 is in addition to the information on current financial effects required
under ESRS 2 SBM-3 para 48 (d). The objective of this Disclosure Requirement related to:
(a) anticipated financial effects due to material physical risks and transition risks is to provide an understanding
of how these risks have (or could reasonably be expected to have) a material influence on the undertaking’s
financial position, financial performance and cash flows, over the short-, medium- and long- term. The results
of scenario analysis used to conduct resilience analysis as required under paragraphs AR 10 to AR 13 should
inform the assessment of anticipated financial effects from material physical and transition risks.
(b) potential to pursue material climate-related opportunities is to enable an understanding of how the undertaking
may financially benefit from material climate- related opportunities. This disclosure is complementary to the key
performance indicators to be disclosed in accordance with Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2178.
(40) This information is aligned with Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council (EU Climate Law),
Article 2 (1).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 83/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
66. The disclosure of anticipated financial effects from material physical risks required by paragraph 64 (a) shall
include(41):
(a) the monetary amount and proportion (percentage) of assets at material physical risk over the short-, medium-
and long-term before considering climate change adaptation actions; with the monetary amounts of these
assets disaggregated by acute and chronic physical risk(42);
(b) the proportion of assets at material physical risk addressed by the climate change adaptation actions;
(c) the location of significant assets at material physical risk(43); and
(d) the monetary amount and proportion (percentage) of net revenue from its business activities at material physical
risk over the short-, medium- and long-term.
67. The disclosure of anticipated financial effects from material transition risks required by paragraph 64 (b) shall
include:
(a) the monetary amount and proportion (percentage) of assets at material transition risk over the short-, medium-
and long-term before considering climate mitigation actions;
(b) the proportion of assets at material transition risk addressed by the climate change mitigation actions;
(c) a breakdown of the carrying value of the undertaking’s real estate assets by energy-efficiency classes(44);
(d) liabilities that may have to be recognised in financial statements over the short-, medium- and long-term; and
(e) the monetary amount and proportion (percentage) of net revenue from its business activities at material
transition risk over the short-, medium- and long-term including, where relevant, the net revenue from the
undertaking’s customers operating in coal, oil and gas-related activities.
68. The undertaking shall disclose reconciliations to the relevant line items or notes in the financial statements of the
following:
(a) significant amounts of the assets and net revenue at material physical risk (as required by paragraph 66);
(b) significant amounts of the assets, liabilities, and net revenue at material transition risk (as required by paragraph
67).
69. For the disclosure of the potential to pursue climate-related opportunities required by paragraph 64 (c) the
undertaking shall consider(45):
(a) its expected cost savings from climate change mitigation and adaptation actions; and
(b) the potential market size or expected changes to net revenue from low-carbon products and services or
adaptation solutions to which the undertaking has or may have access.
(41) This information is aligned with Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1818 (Climate Benchmark Regulation).
(42) This disclosure requirement is consistent with the requirements included in Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2453 -
Template 5: Banking book - Climate change physical risk: Exposures subject to physical risk.
(43) This disclosure requirement is consistent with the requirements included in Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2453 -
Template 5: Banking book - Climate change physical risk: Exposures subject to physical risk.
(44) This disclosure requirement is consistent with the requirements included in Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2453-
Template 2: Banking book - Climate change transition risk: Loans collateralised by immovable property - Energy efficiency of the
collateral.
(45) This information is aligned with Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1818 (Climate Benchmark Regulation).
84/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
70. A quantification of the financial effects that arise from opportunities is not required if such a disclosure does not
meet the qualitative characteristics of useful information included under ESRS 1 Appendix B Qualitative characteristics
of information.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 85/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix A
Application Requirements
This Appendix is an integral part of the ESRS E1. It supports the application of the disclosure requirements set out in this
standard and has the same authority as the other parts of the Standard.
Strategy
Disclosure Requirement E1-1 – Transition plan for climate change mitigation
AR 1. A transition plan relates to the undertaking’s efforts in climate change mitigation. When disclosing its transition
plan, the undertaking is expected to provide a high-level explanation of how it will adjust its strategy and business
model to ensure compatibility with the transition to a sustainable economy and with the limiting of global
warming to 1.5°C in line with the Paris Agreement (or an updated inter national agreement on climate change)
and the objective of achieving climate neutrality by 2050 with no or limited overshoot as established in
Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 (European Climate Law), and where applicable, how it will adjust its exposure to coal,
and oil and gas-related activities.
AR 2. Sectoral pathways have not yet been defined by the public policies for all sectors. Hence, the disclosure under
paragraph 16 (a) on the compatibility of the transition plan with the objective of limiting global warming to 1.5°
C should be understood as the disclosure of the undertaking’s GHG emissions reduction target. The disclosure
under paragraph 16 (a) shall be benchmarked in relation to a pathway to 1.5°C. This benchmark should be based
on either a sectoral decarbonisation pathway if available for the undertaking’s sector or an economy-wide
scenario bearing in mind its limitations (i.e., it is a simple translation of emission reduction objectives from the
state to undertaking level). This AR should be read also in conjunction with AR 26 and AR 27 and the sectoral
decarbonisation pathways they refer to.
AR 3. When disclosing the information required under paragraph 16(d) the undertaking may consider:
(a) the cumulative locked-in GHG emissions associated with key assets from the reporting year until 2030
and 2050 in tCO2eq. This will be assessed as the sum of the estimated Scopes 1 and 2 GHG emissions over
the operating lifetime of the active and firmly planned key assets. Key assets are those owned or controlled by
the undertaking, and they consist of existing or planned assets (such as stationary or mobile installations,
facilities, and equipment) that are sources of either significant direct or energy-indirect GHG emissions. Firmly
planned key assets are those that the undertaking will most likely deploy within the next 5 years.
(b) the cumulative locked-in GHG emissions associated with the direct use-phase GHG emissions of sold products
in tCO2eq, assessed as the sales volume of products in the reporting year multiplied by the sum of estimated
direct use-phase GHG emissions over their expected lifetime. This requirement only applies if the undertaking
has identified the Scope 3 category “use of sold products” as significant under Disclosure Requirement E1-6
paragraph 51; and
(c) an explanation of the plans to manage, i.e., to transform, decommission or phase out its GHG-intensive and
energy-intensive assets and products.
AR 4. When disclosing the information required under paragraph 16 (e), the undertaking shall explain how the
alignment of its economic activities with the provisions of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2139 is
expected to evolve over time to support its transition to a sustainable economy. In doing so, the undertaking shall
take account of the key performance indicators required to be disclosed under Article 8 of Regulation
(EU) 2020/852 (in particular taxonomy-aligned revenue and CapEx and, if applicable, CapEx plans).
86/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 5. When disclosing the information required under paragraph 16 (f), the undertaking shall state whether or not it is
excluded from the EU Paris-aligned Benchmarks in accordance with the exclusion criteria stated in Articles 12.1
(d) to (g)(46) and 12.2 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2020/1818 (Climate Benchmark Standards
Regulation)(47).
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 - Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with
strategy and business model
AR 6. When disclosing the information on the scope of the resilience analysis as required under paragraph 19 (a), the
undertaking shall explain which part of its own operations and upstream and downstream value chain as well as
which material physical risks and transition risks may have been excluded from the analysis.
AR 7. When disclosing the information on how the resilience analysis has been conducted as required under paragraph
19 (b), the undertaking shall explain:
(a) the critical assumptions about how the transition to a lower-carbon and resilient economy will affect its
surrounding macroeconomic trends, energy consumption and mix, and technology deployment assumptions;
(b) the time horizons applied and their alignment with the climate and business scenarios considered for
determining material physical and transition risks (paragraphs AR 11to AR 12) and setting GHG emissions
reduction targets (reported under Disclosure Requirement E1-4); and
(c) how the estimated anticipated financial effects from material physical and transition risks (as required by
Disclosure Requirement E1-9) as well as the mitigation actions and resources (disclosed under Disclosure
Requirement E1-3) were considered.
AR 8. When disclosing the information on the results of the resilience analysis as required under paragraph 19 (c), the
undertaking shall explain:
(a) the areas of uncertainties of the resilience analysis and to what extent the assets and business activities at risk
are considered within the definition of the undertaking’s strategy, investment decisions, and current and
planned mitigation actions;
(b) the ability of the undertaking to adjust or adapt its strategy and business model to climate change over the
short-, medium- and long-term, including securing ongoing access to finance at an affordable cost of capital,
the ability to redeploy, upgrade or decommission existing assets, shifting its products and services portfolio,
or reskilling its workforce.
(46) Article 12.1 of the Climate Benchmark Standards Regulation states that “Administrators of EU Paris-aligned Benchmarks shall exclude the
following companies:
a) companies that derive 1% or more of their revenues from exploration, mining, extraction, distribution or refining of hard coal and lignite; or
b) companies that derive 10% or more of their revenues from exploration, extraction, distribution or refining of oil fuels; or
c) companies that derive 50% or more of their revenues from exploration, extraction, manufacturing or distribution of gaseous fuels; or
d) companies that derive 50% or more of their revenues from electricity generation with a GHG intensity of more than 100 g CO2 e/KWh.”
Article 12.2 states that “Administrators of EU Paris-aligned Benchmarks shall exclude from those benchmarks any companies that are found or
estimated by them or by external data providers to significantly harm one or more of the environmental objectives referred to in Article 9 of
Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council, in accordance with the rules on estimations laid down in Article 13(2)
of this Regulation.”.
(47) This disclosure requirement is consistent with the requirements in Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2453 - template
1 climate change transition risk.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 87/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 Description of the processes to identify and assess material climate-
related impacts, risks and opportunities
AR 9. When disclosing the information on the processes to identify and assess climate impacts as required under
paragraph 20 (a), the undertaking shall explain how it has:
(a) screened its activities and plans in order to identify actual and potential future GHG emission sources and, if
applicable, drivers for other climate-related impacts (e.g., emissions of black carbon or tropospheric ozone or
land-use change) in own operations and along the value chain; and
(b) assessed its actual and potential impacts on climate change (i.e., its total GHG emissions).
AR 10. The undertaking may link the information disclosed under paragraphs 20 (a) and AR 9 to the information
disclosed under the following Disclosure Requirements: Disclosure Requirement E1-1, paragraph 16 (d) on
locked-in GHG emissions; Disclosure Requirement E1-4 and Disclosure Requirement E1-6.
AR 11. When disclosing the information on the processes to identify and assess physical risks as required under
paragraph 20 (b), the undertaking shall explain whether and how:
(a) it has identified climate-related hazards (see table below) over the short-, medium- and long-term and screened
whether its assets and business activities may be exposed to these hazards;
(b) it has defined short-, medium- and long-term time horizons and how these definitions are linked to the
expected lifetime of its assets, strategic planning horizons and capital allocation plans;
(c) it has assessed the extent to which its assets and business activities may be exposed and are sensitive to the
identified climate-related hazards, taking into consideration the likelihood, magnitude and duration of the
hazards as well as the geospatial coordinates (such as Nomenclature of Territorial Units of Statistics- NUTS for
the EU territory) specific to the undertaking’s locations and supply chains; and
(d) the identification of climate-related hazards and the assessment of exposure and sensitivity are informed by
high emissions climate scenarios, which may, for example, be based on IPCC SSP5-8.5, relevant regional
climate projections based on these emission scenarios, or NGFS (Network for Greening the Financial System)
climate scenarios with high physical risk such as “Hot house world” or “Too little, too late”. For general
requirements regarding climate-related scenario analysis see paragraphs 18, 19, AR 13 to AR 15.
Classification of climate-related hazards
(Source: Commission delegated regulation (EU) 2021/2139)
Temperature-related Wind-related Water-related Solid mass- related
Chronic Changing temperature Changing wind Changing precipitation Coastal erosion
(air, freshwater, marine patterns patterns and types (rain,
water) hail, snow/ice)
Heat stress Precipitation or Soil degradation
hydrological variability
Temperature variability Ocean acidification Soil erosion
Permafrost thawing Saline intrusion Solifluction
88/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Sea level rise
Water stress
Acute Heat wave Cyclones, hurricanes, Drought Avalanche
typhoons
Cold wave/frost Storms (including Heavy precipitation (rain, Landslide
blizzards, dust, and hail, snow/ice)
sandstorms)
Wildfire Tornado Flood (coastal, fluvial, Subsidence
pluvial, ground water)
Glacial lake outburst
AR 12. When disclosing the information on the processes to identify transition risks and opportunities as required under
paragraph 20 (c), the undertaking shall explain whether and how it has:
(a) identified transition events (see the table with examples below) over the short-, medium- and long-term and
screened whether its assets and business activities may be exposed to these events. In case of transition risks
and opportunities, what is considered long-term may cover more than 10 years and may be aligned with
climate-related public policy goals;
(b) assessed the extent to which its assets and business activities may be exposed and are sensitive to the identified
transition events, taking into consideration the likelihood, magnitude and duration of the transition events;
(c) informed the identification of transition events and the assessment of exposure by climate-related scenario
analysis, considering at least a scenario consistent with the Paris Agreement and limiting climate change to
1.5°C, for example, based on scenarios of the International Energy Agency (Net zero Emissions by 2050,
Sustainable Development Scenario, etc), or NGFS (Network for Greening the Financial System) climate
scenarios. For the general requirements related to climate-related scenario analysis see paragraphs 18, 19, AR
13 to AR 15; and
(d) identified assets and business activities that are incompatible with or need significant efforts to be compatible
with a transition to a climate-neutral economy (for example, due to significant locked-in GHG emissions or
incompatibility with the requirements for Taxonomy-alignment under Commission Delegated Regulation
(EU) 2021/2139).
Examples of climate-related transition events (examples based on TCFD classification)
Policy and legal Technology Market Reputation
Increased pricing of GHG Substitution of existing Changing customer Shifts in consumer
emissions products and services with behaviour preferences
lower emissions options
Enhanced emissions- Unsuccessful investment in Uncertainty in market Stigmatization of sector
reporting obligations new technologies signals
Mandates on and regulation Costs of transition to lower Increased cost of raw Increased stakeholder
of existing products and emissions technology materials concern
services
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 89/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Mandates on and regulation Negative stakeholder
of existing production feedback
processes
Exposure to litigation
Climate-related scenario analysis
AR 13. When disclosing the information required under paragraphs 19, 20, 21, AR 10 and AR 11, the undertaking shall
explain how it has used climate-related scenario analysis that is commensurate to its circumstances to inform the
identification and assessment of physical and transition risks and opportunities over the short-, medium- and
long-term, including:
(a) which scenarios were used, their sources and alignment with state-of-the-art science;
(b) narratives, time horizons, and endpoints used with a discussion of why it believes the range of scenarios used
covers its plausible risks and uncertainties;
(c) the key forces and drivers taken into consideration in each scenario and why these are relevant to the
undertaking, for example, policy assumptions, macroeconomic trends, energy usage and mix, and technology
assumptions; and
(d) key inputs and constraints of the scenarios, including their level of detail (e.g., whether the analysis of physical
climate-related risks is based on geospatial coordinates specific to the undertaking’s locations or national- or
regional-level broad data).
AR 14. When conducting scenario analysis, the undertaking may consider the following guidance: TCFD Technical
Supplement on “The Use of Scenario Analysis in Disclosure of Climate-Related Risks and Opportunities” (2017);
TCFD “Guidance on Scenario Analysis for Non-Financial Companies” (2020); ISO 14091:2021 “Adaptation to
climate change — Guidelines on vulnerability, impacts and risk assessment”; any other recognised industry
standards such as NGFS (Network for Greening the Financial System); and EU, national, regional and local
regulations.
AR 15. The undertaking shall briefly explain how the climate scenarios used are compatible with the critical climate-
related assumptions made in the financial statements.
Disclosure Requirement E1-2 – Policies related to climate change mitigation and adaptation
AR 16. Policies related to either climate change mitigation or climate adaptation may be disclosed separately as their
objectives, people involved, actions and resources needed to implement them are different.
AR 17. Policies related to climate change mitigation address the management of the undertaking’s GHG emissions, GHG
removals and transition risks over different time horizons, in its own operations and/or in the upstream and
downstream value chain. The requirement under paragraph 14 may relate to stand-alone climate change
mitigation policies as well as relevant policies on other matters that indirectly support climate change mitigation
including training policies, procurement or supply chain policies, investment policies or product development
policies.
AR 18. Policies related to climate change adaptation address the management of the undertaking’s physical climate risks
and of its transition risks related to climate change adaptation. The requirement under paragraphs 22 and 25
may relate to stand-alone climate change adaptation policies as well as relevant policies on other matters that
indirectly support climate change adaptation including training policies, and emergency or health and safety
policies.
90/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Disclosure Requirements E1-3 – Actions and resources in relation to climate change policies
AR 19. When disclosing the information on actions as required under paragraphs 29 (a) and 29 (b), the undertaking may:
(a) disclose its key actions taken and/or plans to implement climate change mitigation and adaptation policies in
its single or separate actions;
(b) aggregate types of mitigation actions (decarbonisation levers) such as energy efficiency, electrification, fuel
switching, use of renewable energy, products change, and supply-chain decarbonisation that fit the
undertakings' specific actions;
(c) disclose the list of key mitigation actions alongside the measurable targets (as required by Disclosure
Requirement E1-4) with disaggregation by decarbonisation levers; and
(d) disclose the climate change adaptation actions by type of adaptation solution such as nature-based
adaptation, engineering, or technological solutions.
AR 20. When disclosing the information on resources as required under paragraph 29 (c), the undertaking shall only
disclose the significant OpEx and CapEx amounts required for the implementation of the actions as the purpose
of this information is to demonstrate the credibility of its actions rather than to reconcile the disclosed amounts
to the financial statements. The disclosed CapEx and OpEx amounts shall be the additions made to both tangible
and intangible assets during the current financial year as well as the planned additions for future periods of
implementing the actions. The disclosed amounts shall only be the incremental financial investments directly
contributing to the achievement of the undertaking’s targets.
AR 21. In line with the requirements of ESRS 2 MDR-A, the undertaking shall explain if and to what extent its ability to
implement the actions depends on the availability and allocation of resources. Ongoing access to finance at an
affordable cost of capital can be critical for the implementation of the undertaking’s actions, which include its
adjustments to supply/demand changes or its related acquisitions and significant research and development (R&D)
investments.
AR 22. The amounts of OpEx and CapEx required for the implementation of the actions disclosed under paragraph 29 (c)
shall be consistent with the key performance indicators (CapEx and OpEx key performance indicators) and, if
applicable, the CapEx plan required by Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2178. The undertaking shall
explain any potential differences between the significant OpEx and CapEx amounts disclosed under this Standard
and the key performance indicators disclosed under Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2178 due to,
for instance, the disclosure of non-eligible economic activities as defined in that delegated regulation. The
undertaking may structure its actions by economic activity to compare its OpEx and CapEx, and if applicable its
OpEx and/or CapEx plans to its Taxonomy-aligned key performance indicators.
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement E1-4 – Targets related to climate change mitigation and adaptation
AR 23. Under paragraph 34 (a), the undertaking may disclose GHG emission reduction targets in intensity value. Intensity
targets are formulated as ratios of GHG emissions relative to a unit of physical activity or economic output.
Relevant units of activity or output are referred to in ESRS sector-specific standards. In cases where the
undertaking has only set a GHG intensity reduction target, it shall nevertheless disclose the associated absolute
values for the target year and interim target year(s). This may result in a situation where an undertaking is required
to disclose an increase of absolute GHG emissions for the target year and interim target year(s), for example
because it anticipates organic growth of its business.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 91/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 24. When disclosing the information required under paragraph 34 (b), the undertaking shall specify the share of the
target related to each respective GHG emission Scope (1, 2 or 3). The undertaking shall state the method used to
calculate Scope 2 GHG emissions included in the target (i.e., either the location-based or market-based method). If
the boundary of the GHG emission reduction target diverges from that of the GHG emissions reported under
Disclosure Requirement E1-6, the undertaking shall disclose which gases are covered, the respective percentage of
Scope 1, 2, 3 and total GHG emissions covered by the target. For the GHG emission reduction targets of its
subsidiaries, the undertaking shall analogously apply these requirements at the level of the subsidiary.
AR 25. When disclosing the information required under paragraph 34(c) on base year and baseline value:
(a) the undertaking shall briefly explain how it has ensured that the baseline value against which the progress
towards the target is measured is representative in terms of the activities covered and the influences from
external factors (e.g., temperature anomalies in a certain year influencing the amount of energy consumption
and related GHG emissions). This can be done by the normalisation of the baseline value, or, by using a
baseline value that is derived from a 3-year average if this increases the representativeness and allows a more
faithful representation;
(b) the baseline value and base year shall not be changed unless significant changes in either the target or
reporting boundary occur. In such a case, the undertaking shall explain how the new baseline value affects the
new target, its achievement and presentation of progress over time. To foster comparability, when setting new
targets, the undertaking shall select a recent base year that does not precede the first reporting year of the new
target period by longer than 3 years. For example, for 2030 as the target year and a target period between
2025 and 2030, the base year shall be selected from the period between 2022 and 2025;
(c) the undertaking shall update its base year from 2030 and after every 5-year period thereafter. This means that
before 2030, the base years chosen by undertakings’ may be either the currently applied base year for existing
targets or the first year of application of the sustainability reporting requirements as set out in Article 5(2) of
Directive (EU) 2022/2464 (2024, 2025 or 2026) and, after 2030, every 5 years (2030, 2035, etc); and
(d) when presenting climate-related targets, the undertaking may disclose the progress in meeting these targets
made before its current base year. In doing so, the undertaking shall, to the greatest extent possible, ensure
that the information on past progress is consistent with the requirements of this Standard. In the case of
methodological differences, for example, regarding target boundaries, the undertaking shall provide a brief
explanation for these differences.
AR 26. When disclosing the information required under paragraphs 34 (d) and 34 (e), the undertaking shall present the
information over the target period with reference to a sector- specific, if available, or a cross-sector emission
pathway compatible with limiting global warming to 1.5°C. For this purpose, the undertaking shall calculate
a 1.5°C aligned reference target value for Scope 1 and 2 (and, if applicable, a separate one for Scope 3) against
which its own GHG emission reduction targets or interim targets in the respective Scopes can be compared.
AR 27. The reference target value may be calculated by multiplying the GHG emissions in the base year with either a
sector-specific (sectoral decarbonisation methodology) or cross-sector (contraction methodology) emission
reduction factor. These emission reduction factors can be derived from different sources. The undertaking should
ensure that the source used is based on an emission reduction pathway compatible with limiting global warming
to 1.5°C.
AR 28. The emission reduction factors are subject to further development. Consequently, undertakings are encouraged to
only use updated publicly available information.
92/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
2030 2050
Cross-sector (ACA) reductions pathway based on the year 2020 as
- 42% - 90%
the reference year
Source: based on Pathways to Net-zero –SBTi Technical Summary (Version 1.0, October 2021)
AR 29. The reference target value is dependent on the base year and baseline emissions of the undertaking’s GHG
emission reduction target. As a result, the reference target value for undertakings with a recent base year or from
higher baseline emissions may be less challenging to achieve than it will be for undertakings that have already
taken ambitious past actions to reduce GHG emissions. Therefore, undertakings that have in the past achieved
GHG emissions reductions compatible with either a 1.5°C-aligned cross-sector or sector-specific pathway, may
adjust their baseline emissions accordingly to determine the reference target value. Accordingly, if the undertaking
is adjusting the baseline emissions to determine the reference target value, it shall not consider GHG emission
reductions that precede the year 2020 and it shall provide appropriate evidence of its past achieved GHG
emission reduction.
AR 30. When disclosing the information required under paragraph 34 (f), the undertaking shall explain:
(a) by reference to its climate change mitigation actions, the decarbonisation levers and their estimated
quantitative contributions to the achievement of its GHG emission reduction targets broken down by each
Scope (1, 2 and 3);
(b) whether it plans to adopt new technologies and the role of these to achieve its GHG emission reduction
targets; and
(c) whether and how it has considered a diverse range of climate scenarios, at least including a climate scenario
compatible with limiting global warming to 1.5°C, to detect relevant environmental-, societal-, technology-,
market- and policy-related developments and determine its decarbonisation levers.
AR 31. The undertaking may present its GHG emission reduction targets together with its climate change mitigation
actions (see paragraph AR 19) as a table or graphical pathway showing developments over time. The following
figure and table provide examples combining targets and decarbonisation levers:
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 93/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Base year Up to 2050
2030 target 2035 target …
(e.g., 2025) target
GHG emissions (ktCO2eq) 100 60 40
Energy efficiency and consumption reduction - - 10 - 4
Material efficiency and consumption
- - 5 -
reduction
Fuel switching - - 2 -
Electrification - - - 10
Use of renewable energy - - 10 - 3
Phase out, substitution or modification of
- - 8 -
product
Phase out, substitution or modification of
- - 5 - 3
process
Other - -
Disclosure Requirement E1-5 – Energy consumption and mix
Calculation guidance
AR 32. When preparing the information on energy consumption required under paragraph 35, the undertaking shall:
(a) only report energy consumed from processes owned or controlled by the undertaking applying the same
perimeter applied for reporting GHG Scopes 1 and 2 emissions;
(b) exclude feedstocks and fuels that are not combusted for energy purposes. The undertaking that consumes fuel
as feedstocks can disclose information on this consumption separately from the required disclosures;
(c) ensure all quantitative energy-related information is reported in either Mega-Watt- hours (MWh) in Lower
Heating Value or net calorific value. If raw data of energy- related information is only available in energy units
other than MWh (such as Giga-Joules (GJ) or British Thermal Units (Btu)), in volume units (such as cubic feet or
gallons) or in mass units (such as kilograms or pounds), they shall be converted to MWh using suitable
conversion factors (see for example Annex II of the Fifth Assessment IPCC report). Conversion factors for
fuels shall be made transparent and applied in a consistent manner;
(d) ensure all quantitative energy-related information is reported as final energy consumption, referring to the
amount of energy the undertaking actually consumes using for example the table in Annex IV of
Directive 2012/27 of the European Parliament and of the Council(48)on energy efficiency;
(e) avoid double counting fuel consumption when disclosing self-generated energy consumption. If the
undertaking generates electricity from either a non-renewable or renewable fuel source and then consumes
the generated electricity, the energy consumption shall be counted only once under fuel consumption;
(f) not offset energy consumption even if onsite generated energy is sold to and used by a third party;
(g) not count energy that is sourced from within the organisational boundary under “purchased or acquired”
energy;
(48) Directive 2012/27/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on energy efficiency, amending
Directives 2009/125/EC and 2010/30/EU and repealing Directives 2004/8/EC and 2006/32/EC (OJ L 315, 14.11.2012, p. 1).
94/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(h) account for steam, heat or cooling received as “waste energy” from a third party’s industrial processes under
“purchased or acquired” energy;
(i) account for renewable hydrogen(49) as a renewable fuel. Hydrogen that is not completely derived from
renewable sources shall be included under “fuel consumption from other non-renewable sources”; and
(j) adopt a conservative approach when splitting the electricity, steam, heat or cooling between renewable and
non-renewable sources based on the approach applied to calculate market-based Scope 2 GHG emissions.
The undertaking shall only consider these energy consumptions as deriving from renewable sources if the
origin of the purchased energy is clearly defined in the contractual arrangements with its suppliers
(renewable power purchasing agreement, standardised green electricity tariff, market instruments like
Guarantee of Origin from renewable sources in Europe(50) or similar instruments like Renewable Energy
Certificates in the US and Canada, etc.).
AR 33. The information required under paragraph 37 (a) is applicable if the undertaking is operating in at least one high
climate impact sector. The information required under paragraph 38 (a) to (e). shall also include energy from
fossil sources consumed in operations that are not in high climate impact sectors.
AR 34. The information on Energy consumption and mix may be presented using the following tabular format for high
climate impact sectors and for all other sector by omitting rows (1) to (5).
Energy consumption and mix Comparative Year N
(1) Fuel consumption from coal and coal products (MWh)
(2) Fuel consumption from crude oil and petroleum products (MWh)
(3) Fuel consumption from natural gas (MWh)
(4) Fuel consumption from other fossil sources (MWh)
(5) Consumption of purchased or acquired electricity, heat, steam, and
cooling from fossil sources (MWh)
(6) Total fossil energy consumption (MWh) (calculated as the sum of
lines 1 to 5)
Share of fossil sources in total
energy consumption (%)
(7) Consumption from nuclear sources (MWh)
Share of consumption from nuclear
sources in total energy consumption (%)
(49) Compliant with the requirements in delegated acts for hydrogen from renewable sources: Commission delegated regulation of
10 February 2023 supplementing Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council by establishing a Union
methodology setting out detailed rules for the production of renewable liquid and gaseous transport fuels of non-biological origin;
and Commission delegated regulation of 10 February 2023 supplementing Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament
and of the Council by establishing a minimum threshold for greenhouse gas emissions savings of recycled carbon fuels and by
specifying a methodology for assessing greenhouse gas emissions savings from renewable liquid and gaseous transport fuels of non-
biological origin and from recycled carbon fuel.
(50) Based on Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the promotion of the
use of energy from renewable sources.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 95/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(8) Fuel consumption for renewable sources, including biomass (also
comprising industrial and municipal waste of biologic origin, biogas,
renewable hydrogen, etc.) (MWh)
(9) Consumption of purchased or acquired electricity, heat, steam, and
cooling from renewable sources (MWh)
(10) The consumption of self-generated non-fuel renewable energy
(MWh)
(11) Total renewable energy consumption (MWh) (calculated as the
sum of lines 8 to 10)
Share of renewable sources in total
energy consumption (%)
Total energy consumption (MWh) (calculated as the sum of lines 6,
and 11)
AR 35. The total energy consumption with a distinction between fossil, nuclear and renewable energy consumption may
be presented graphically in the sustainability statement showing developments over time (e.g., through a pie or
bar chart).
Energy intensity based on net revenue
Calculation guidance
AR 36. When preparing the information on energy intensity required under paragraph 40, the undertaking shall:
(a) calculate the energy intensity ratio using the following formula:
(b) express the total energy consumption in MWh and the net revenue in monetary units (e.g., Euros);
(c) the numerator and denominator shall only consist of the proportion of the total final energy consumption (in
the numerator) and net revenue (in the denominator) that are attributable to activities in high climate impact
sectors. In effect, there should be consistency in the scope of both the numerator and denominator;
(d) calculate the total energy consumption in line with the requirement in paragraph 37;
(e) calculate the net revenue in line with the accounting standards requirements applicable for the financial
statements, i.e., IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers or local GAAP requirements.
AR 37. The quantitative information may be presented in the following table.
Energy intensity per net revenue Comparative N % N / N-1
Total energy consumption from activities in high
climate impact sectors per net revenue from activities
in high climate impact sectors (MWh/Monetary unit)
96/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Connectivity of energy intensity based on net revenue with financial reporting information
AR 38. The reconciliation of net revenue from activities in high climate impact sectors to the relevant financial statements
line item or disclosure (as required by paragraph 43) may be presented either:
(a) by a cross-reference to the related line item or disclosure in the financial statements; or
(b) If the net revenue cannot be directly cross-referenced to a line item or disclosure in the financial statements, by
a quantitative reconciliation using the below tabular format.
Net revenue from activities in high climate impact sectors
used to calculate energy intensity
Net revenue (other)
Total net revenue (Financial statements)
Disclosure Requirements E1-6 – Gross Scopes 1, 2, 3 and Total GHG emissions
Calculation guidance
AR 39. When preparing the information for reporting GHG emissions as required by paragraph 44, the undertaking shall:
(a) consider the principles, requirements and guidance provided by the GHG Protocol Corporate Standard
(version 2004). The undertaking may consider Commission Recommendation (EU) 2021/2279(51) or the
requirements stipulated by EN ISO 14064-1:2018. If the undertaking already applies the GHG accounting
methodology of ISO 14064- 1: 2018, it shall nevertheless comply with the requirements of this standard
(e.g., regarding reporting boundaries and the disclosure of market-based Scope 2 GHG emissions);
(b) disclose the methodologies, significant assumptions and emissions factors used to calculate or measure GHG
emissions accompanied by the reasons why they were chosen, and provide a reference or link to any
calculation tools used;
(c) include emissions of CO2, CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs, SF6, and NF3. Additional GHG may be considered when
significant; and
(d) use the most recent Global Warming Potential (GWP) values published by the IPCC based on a 100-year time
horizon to calculate CO2eq emissions of non-CO2 gases.
AR 40. When preparing the information for reporting GHG emissions from its associates, joint ventures, unconsolidated
subsidiaries (investment entities) and contractual arrangements as required by paragraph 50, the undertaking shall
consolidate 100% of the GHG emissions of the entities it operationally controls. In practice, this happens when the
undertakings holds the license - or permit - to operate the assets from these associates, joint ventures,
unconsolidated subsidiaries (investment entities) and contractual arrangements. When the undertaking has a
contractually defined part-time operational control, it shall consolidate 100% the GHG emitted during the time of
its operational control.
(51) Commission Recommendation (EU) 2021/2279 of 15 December 2021 on the use of the Environmental Footprint methods to
measure and communicate the life cycle environmental performance of products and organisations (OJ L 471, 30.12.2021, p. 1).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 97/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 41. In line with ESRS 1 chapter 3.7, the undertaking shall disaggregate information on its GHG emissions as
appropriate. For example, the undertaking may disaggregate its Scope 1, 2, 3, or total GHG emissions by country,
operating segments, economic activity, subsidiary, GHG category (CO2, CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs, SF6, NF3, and
other GHG considered by the undertaking) or source type (stationary combustion, mobile combustion, process
emissions and fugitive emissions).
AR 42. An undertaking might have a different reporting period from some or all of the entities in its value chain. In such
circumstances, the undertaking is permitted to measure its GHG emissions in accordance with paragraph 44 using
information for reporting periods that are different from its own reporting period if that information is obtained
from entities in its value chain with reporting periods that are different from the undertaking’s reporting period,
on the condition that:
(a) the undertaking uses the most recent data available from those entities in its value chain to measure and
disclose its greenhouse gas emissions;
(b) the length of the reporting periods is the same; and
(c) the undertaking discloses the effects of significant events and changes in circumstances (relevant to its GHG
emissions) that occur between the reporting dates of the entities in its value chain and the date of the
undertaking’s general purpose financial statements.
AR 43. When preparing the information on gross Scope 1 GHG emissions required under paragraph 48 (a), the
undertaking shall:
(a) calculate or measure GHG emissions from stationary combustion, mobile combustion, process emissions and
fugitive emissions; and use suitable activity data that include the non-renewable fuel consumption;
(b) use suitable and consistent emission factors;
(c) disclose biogenic emissions of CO2 from the combustion or bio-degradation of biomass separately from the
Scope 1 GHG emissions, but include emissions of other types of GHG (in particular CH4 and N2O);
(d) not include any removals, or any purchased, sold or transferred carbon credits or GHG allowances in the
calculation of Scope 1 GHG emissions; and
(e) for activities reporting under the EU ETS, report on Scope 1 emissions following the EU ETS methodology. The
EU ETS methodology may also be applied to activities in geographies and sectors that are not covered by the
EU ETS.
AR 44. When preparing the information on the percentage of Scope 1 GHG emissions from regulated emission trading
schemes required under paragraph 48 (b), the undertaking shall:
(a) consider GHG emissions from the installations it operates that are subject to regulated Emission Trading
Schemes (ETS), including the EU-ETS, national ETS and non-EU ETS, if applicable;
(b) only include emissions of CO2, CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs, SF6, and NF3;
(c) ensure the same accounting period for gross Scope 1 GHG emissions and GHG emissions regulated under the
ETS; and
(d) calculate the share by using the following formula:
GHG Emissions in (t CO eq) from EU ETS installations + national ETS installations + nonEU ETS installations
2
Scope 1 GHG emissions (t CO2eq)
AR 45. When preparing the information on gross Scope 2 GHG emissions required under paragraph 49, the undertaking
shall:
(a) consider the principles and requirements of the GHG Protocol Scope 2 Guidance (version 2015, in particular
the Scope 2 quality criteria in chapter 7.1 relating to contractual instruments); it may also consider
Commission Recommendation (EU) 2021/2279 or the relevant requirements for the quantification of
indirect GHG emissions from imported energy in EN ISO 14064-1:2018;
98/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) include purchased or acquired electricity, steam, heat, and cooling consumed by the undertaking;
(c) avoid double counting of GHG emissions reported under Scope 1 or 3;
(d) apply the location-based and market-based methods to calculate Scope 2 GHG emissions and provide
information on the share and types of contractual instruments. Location-based method quantifies Scope 2
GHG emissions based on average energy generation emission factors for defined locations, including local,
subnational, or national boundaries (GHG Protocol, “Scope 2 Guidance”, Glossary, 2015). Market-based
method quantifies Scope 2 GHG emissions based on GHG emissions emitted by the generators from which
the reporting entity contractually purchases electricity bundled with instruments, or unbundled instruments
on their own (GHG Protocol, “Scope 2 Guidance”, Glossary, 2015); in this case, the undertaking may disclose
the share of market-based scope 2 GHG emissions linked to purchased electricity bundled with instruments
such as Guarantee of Origins or Renewable Energy Certificates. The undertaking shall provide information
about the share and types of contractual instruments used for the sale and purchase of energy bundled with
attributes about the energy generation or for unbundled energy attribute claims.
(e) disclose biogenic emissions of CO2 carbon from the combustion or biodegradation of biomass separately
from the Scope 2 GHG emissions but include emissions of other types of GHG (in particular CH4 and N2O).
In case the emission factors applied do not separate the percentage of biomass or biogenic CO2, the
undertaking shall disclose this. In case GHG emissions other than CO2 (particularly CH4 and N2O) are not
available for, or excluded from, location-based grid average emissions factors or with the market-based
method information, the undertaking shall disclose this.
(f) not include any removals, or any purchased, sold or transferred carbon credits or GHG allowances in the
calculation of Scope 2 GHG emissions.
AR 46. When preparing the information on gross Scope 3 GHG emissions required under paragraph 51, the undertaking
shall:
(a) consider the principles and provisions of the GHG Protocol Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and
Reporting Standard (Version 2011); and it may consider Commission Recommendation (EU) 2021/2279 or
the relevant requirements for the quantification of indirect GHG emissions from EN ISO 14064-1:2018;
(b) if it is a financial institution, consider the GHG Accounting and Reporting Standard for the Financial Industry
from the Partnership for Carbon Accounting Financial (PCAF), specifically part A “Financed Emissions”
(version December 2022);
(c) screen its total Scope 3 GHG emissions based on the 15 Scope 3 categories identified by the GHG Protocol
Corporate Standard and GHG Protocol Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard
(Version 2011) using appropriate estimates. Alternatively, it may screen its indirect GHG emissions based on
the categories provided by EN ISO 14064-1:2018 clause 5.2.4 (excluding indirect GHG emissions from
imported energy);
(d) identify and disclose its significant Scope 3 categories based on the magnitude of their estimated GHG
emissions and other criteria provided by GHG Protocol Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and
Reporting Standard (Version 2011, p. 61 and 65-68) or EN ISO 14064-1:2018 Annex H.3.2, such as
financial spend, influence, related transition risks and opportunities or stakeholder views;
(e) calculate or estimate GHG emissions in significant Scope 3 categories using suitable emissions factors;
(f) update Scope 3 GHG emissions in each significant category every year on the basis of current activity data;
update the full Scope 3 GHG inventory at least every 3 years or on the occurrence of a significant event or a
significant change in circumstances (a significant event or significant change in circumstances can, for
example, relate to changes in the undertaking’s activities or structure, changes in the activities or structure of
its upstream and downstream value chain(s), a change in calculation methodology or in the discovery of
errors);”);
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 99/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(g) disclose the extent to which the undertaking’s Scope 3 GHG emissions are measured using inputs from specific
activities within the entity’s upstream and downstream value chain, and disclose the percentage of emissions
calculated using primary data obtained from suppliers or other value chain partners.
(h) for each significant Scope 3 GHG category, disclose the reporting boundaries considered, the calculation
methods for estimating the GHG emissions as well as if and which calculation tools were applied. The Scope
3 categories should be consistent with the GHGP and include:
i. indirect Scope 3 GHG emissions from the consolidated accounting group (the parent and its subsidiaries),
ii. indirect Scope 3 GHG emissions from associates, joint ventures, and unconsolidated subsidiaries for which
the undertaking has the ability to control the operational activities and relationships (i.e., operational
control),
iii. Scope 1, 2 and 3 GHG emissions from associates, joint ventures, unconsolidated subsidiaries (investment
entities) and joint arrangements for which the undertaking does not have operational control and when
these entities are part of the undertaking’s upstream and dopwnstream value chain.
(i) disclose a list of Scope 3 GHG emissions categories included in and excluded from the inventory with a
justification for excluded Scope 3 categories;
(j) disclose biogenic emissions of CO from the combustion or biodegradation of biomass that occur in its
2
upstream and downstream value chain separately from the gross Scope 3 GHG emissions, and include
emissions of other types of GHG (such as CH and N2O), and emissions of CO2 that occur in the life cycle of
4
biomass other than from combustion or biodegradation (such as GHG emissions from processing or
transporting biomass) in the calculation of Scope 3 GHG emissions;
(k) not include any removals, or any purchased, sold or transferred carbon credits or GHG allowances in the
calculation of Scope 3 GHG emissions;
AR 47. When preparing the information on the total GHG emissions required under paragraph 52, the undertaking shall:
(a) apply the following formulas to calculate the total GHG emissions:
(b) disclose total GHG emissions with a distinction between emissions derived from the location-based and
market-based methods applied while measuring the underlying Scope 2 GHG emissions.
AR 48. The undertaking shall disclose its total GHG emissions disaggregated by Scopes 1 and 2 and significant Scope 3 in
accordance with the table below.
Retrospective Milestones and target years
Annual %
Base Compa- % N /
N 2025 2030 (2050) target / Base
year rative N-1
year
Scope 1 GHG emissions
Gross Scope 1 GHG emissions
(tCO2eq)
Percentage of Scope 1
GHG emissions from regulated
emission trading schemes (%)
100/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Scope 2 GHG emissions
Gross location-based Scope 2
GHG emissions (tCO2eq)
Gross market-based Scope 2 GHG
emissions (tCO2eq)
Significant scope 3 GHG emissions
Total Gross indirect (Scope 3)
GHG emissions (tCO2eq)
1 Purchased goods and services
[Optional sub-category: Cloud
computing and data centre
services
2 Capital goods
3 Fuel and energy-related
Activities (not included in Scope1
or Scope 2)
4 Upstream transportation and
distribution
5 Waste generated in opera­
tions
6 Business travelng
7 Employee commuting
8 Upstream leased assets
9 Downstream transportation
10 Processing of sold products
11 Use of sold products
12 End-of-life treatment of sold
products
13 Downstream leased assets
14 Franchises
15 Investments
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 101/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Total GHG emissions
Total GHG emissions (location-
based) (tCO2eq)
Total GHG emissions (market-
based) (tCO2eq)
AR 49. To highlight potential transition risks, the undertaking may disclose its total GHG emissions disaggregated by
major countries and, if applicable, by operating segments (applying the same segments for the financial
statements as required by the accounting standards, i.e., IFRS 8 Operating Segments or local GAAP). Scope 3 GHG
emissions may be excluded from these breakdowns by country if the related data is not readily available.
AR 50. The Scope 3 GHG emissions may also be presented by according to the indirect emission categories defined in EN
ISO 14064-1:2018.
AR 51. If it is material for the undertaking's Scope 3 emissions, it shall disclose the GHG emissions from purchased cloud
computing and data centre services as a subset of the overarching Scope 3 category “upstream purchased goods
and services”.
AR 52. The total GHG emissions disaggregated by Scope 1, 2 and 3 GHG emissions may be graphically presented in the
sustainability statement (e.g., as a bar or pie chart) showing the split of GHG emissions across the value chain
(Upstream, Own operations, Transport, Downstream).
GHG intensity based on net revenue
Calculation guidance
AR 53. When disclosing the information on GHG intensity based on net revenue required under paragraph 53, the
undertaking shall:
(a) calculate the GHG intensity ratio by the following formula:
(b) express the total GHG emissions in metric tonnes of CO2eq and the net revenue in monetary units (e.g., Euros)
and present the results for the market-based and location-based method;
(c) include the total GHG emissions in the numerator and overall net revenue in the denominator;
(d) calculate the total GHG emissions as required by paragraphs 44 (d) and 52; and
(e) calculate the net revenue in line with the requirements in accounting standards applied for financial
statements, i.e., IFRS 15 or local GAAP.
AR 54. The quantitative information may be presented in the following tabular format.
GHG intensity per net revenue Comparative N % N / N-1
Total GHG emissions (location-based) per net revenue
(tCO2eq/Monetary unit)
Total GHG emissions (market-based) per net revenue
(tCO2eq/Monetary unit)
102/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Connectivity of GHG intensity based on revenue with financial reporting information
AR 55. The reconciliation of the net revenue used to calculate GHG intensity to the relevant line item or notes in the
financial statements (as required by paragraph 55) may be done by either:
(a) a cross-reference to the related line item or disclosure in the financial statements; or
(b) if the net revenue cannot be directly cross-referenced to a line item or disclosure in the financial statements, by
a quantitative reconciliation using the below tabular format.
Net revenue used to calculate GHG intensity
Net revenue (other)
Total net revenue (in financial statements)
Disclosure Requirement E1-7 – GHG removals and GHG mitigation projects financed through carbon credits
GHG removals and storage in own operations and the upstream and downstream value chain
AR 56. In addition to their GHG emission inventories, undertakings shall provide transparency on how and to what extent
they either enhance natural sinks or apply technical solutions to remove GHGs from the atmosphere in their own
operations and upstream and downstream value chain. While there are no generally accepted concepts and
methodologies for accounting for GHG removals, this Standard aims to increase transparency on the
undertaking’s efforts to remove GHGs from the atmosphere (paragraphs 56 (a) and 58). The GHG removals
outside the value chain that the undertaking supports through the purchase of carbon credits are to be disclosed
separately as required by paragraphs 56 (b) and 59.
AR 57. When disclosing the information on GHG removals and storage from the undertaking’s own operations and its
upstream and donwstream value chain required under paragraphs 56 (a) and 58, for each removal and storage
activity, the undertaking shall describe:
(a) the GHGs concerned;
(b) whether removal and storage are biogenic or from land-use change (e.g., afforestation, reforestation, forest
restoration, urban tree planting, agroforestry, building soil carbon, etc.), technological (e.g., direct air capture),
or hybrid (e.g., bioenergy with CO2 capture and storage), and technological details about the removal, the type
of storage and, if applicable, the transport of removed GHGs;
(c) if applicable, a brief explanation of whether the activity qualifies as a nature-based solution; and
(d) how the risk of non-permanence is managed, including determining and monitoring leakage and reversal
events, as appropriate.
Calculation guidance
AR 58. When preparing the information on GHG removals and storage from the undertaking’s own operations and its
upstream and donwstream value chain required under paragraphs 56 (a) and 58, the undertaking shall:
(a) consider, as far as applicable, the GHG Protocol Corporate Standard (version 2004), Product Standard (version
2011), Agriculture Guidance (version 2014), Land use, land-use change, and forestry Guidance for GHG
project accounting (version 2006);
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 103/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) apply consensus methods on accounting for GHG removals as soon as they are available, notably the EU
regulatory framework for the certification of CO2 removals;
(c) if applicable, explain the role of removals for its climate change mitigation policy;
(d) include removals from operations that it owns, controls, or contributes to and that have not been sold to
another party through carbon credits;
(e) if applicable, mark those GHG removal activities in own operations or the value chain that have been
converted into carbon credits and sold on to other parties on the voluntary market;
(f) account for the GHG emissions associated with a removal activity, including transport and storage, under
Disclosure Requirement E1-6 (Scopes 1, 2 or 3). To increase transparency on the efficiency of a removal
activity, including transport and storage, the undertaking may disclose the GHG emissions associated with
this activity (e.g., GHG emissions from electricity consumption of direct air capture technologies) alongside,
but separately from, the amount of removed GHG emissions;
(g) in case of a reversal, account for the respective GHG emissions as an offset for the removals in the reporting
period;
(h) use the most recent GWP values published by the IPCC based on a 100-year time horizon to calculate CO2eq
emissions of non-CO2 gases and describe the assumptions made, methodologies and frameworks applied for
calculation of the amount of GHG removals; and
(i) consider nature-based solutions.
AR 59. The undertaking shall disaggregate and separately disclose the GHG removals that occur in its own operations and
those that occur in its upstream and downstream value chain. GHG removal activities in the upstream and
downstream value chain shall include those that the undertaking is actively supporting, for example, through a
cooperation project with a supplier. The undertaking is not expected to include any GHG removals that may
occur in its upstream and downstream value chain that it is not aware of.
AR 60. The quantitative information on GHG removals may be presented by using the following tabular format.
Removals Comparative N % N / N-1
GHG removal activity 1 (e.g.., forest restoration) -
GHG removal activity 2 (e.g.., direct air capture) -
… -
Total GHG removals from own operations (tCO2eq)
GHG removal activity 1 (e.g.., forest restoration) -
GHG removal activity 2 (e.g.., direct air capture) -
… -
Total GHG removals in the upstream and
downstream value chain (tCO2eq)
Reversals (tCO2eq)
104/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
GHG mitigation projects financed through carbon credits
AR 61. Financing GHG emission reduction projects outside the undertaking’s value chain through purchasing carbon
credits that fulfil high-quality standards can be a useful contribution towards mitigating climate change. This
Standard requires the undertaking to disclose whether it uses carbon credits separately from the GHG emissions
(paragraphs 56 (b) and 59) and GHG emission reduction targets (Disclosure Requirement E1-4). It also requires
the undertaking to show the extent of use and which quality criteria it uses for those carbon credits.
AR 62. When disclosing the information on carbon credits required under paragraphs 56 (b) and 59, the undertaking shall
disclose the following disaggregation as applicable:
(a) the share (percentage of volume) of reduction projects and removal projects;
(b) for carbon credits from removal projects, an explanation whether they are from biogenic or technological
sinks;
(c) the share (percentage of volume) for each recognised quality standard;
(d) the share (percentage of volume) issued from projects in the EU; and
(e) the share (percentage of volume) that qualifies as a corresponding adjustment under Article. 6 of the Paris
Agreement.
Calculation guidance
AR 63. When preparing the information on carbon credits required under paragraphs 56 (b) and 59, the undertaking
shall:
(a) Consider recognised quality standards;.
(b) if applicable, explain the role of carbon credits in its climate change mitigation policy;
(c) not include carbon credits issued from GHG emission reduction projects within its value chain as the
respective GHG emission reductions shall already be disclosed under Disclosure Requirement E1-6 (Scope 2
or Scope 3) at the time they occur (i.e., double counting is avoided);
(d) not include carbon credits from GHG removal projects within its value chain as the respective GHG removals
may already be accounted for under Disclosure Requirement E1-7 at the time they occur (i.e., double counting
is avoided);
(e) not disclose carbon credits as an offset for its GHG emissions under Disclosure Requirement E1-6 on GHG
emissions;
(f) not disclose carbon credits as a means to reach the GHG emission reduction targets disclosed under Disclosure
Requirement E1-4; and
(g) calculate the amount of carbon credits to be cancelled in the future, as the sum of carbon credits in metric
tonnes of CO2eq over the duration of existing contractual agreements.
AR 64. The information on carbon credits cancelled in the reporting year and planned to be cancelled in the future may be
presented using the following tabular formats.
Carbon credits cancelled in the reporting
Comparative N
year
Total (tCO2eq)
Share from removal projects (%)
Share from reduction projects (%)
Recognised quality standard 1 (%)
Recognised quality standard 2 (%)
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 105/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Recognised quality standard 3 (%)
…
Share from projects within the EU (%)
Share of carbon credits that qualify as
corresponding adjustments (%)
Carbon credits planned to be cancelled
Amount until [period]
in the future
Total (tCO2eq)
Disclosure Requirement E1-8 – Internal carbon pricing
AR 65. When disclosing the information required under paragraphs 62 and 63, if applicable, the undertaking shall briefly
explain whether and how the carbon prices used in internal carbon pricing schemes are consistent with those used
in financial statements. This shall be done in respect of the internal carbon prices used for,
(a) the assessment of the useful life and residual value of its assets (intangibles, property, plant and equipment);
(b) the impairment of assets; and
(c) the fair value measurement of assets acquired through business acquisitions.
AR 66. The information may be presented by using the following table:
Volume at stake Prices applied Perimeter
Types of internal carbon prices
(tCO2eq) (€/tCO2eq) description
CapEx shadow price
Research and Development (R&D) investment shadow
price
Internal carbon fee or fund
Carbon prices for impairment testing
Etc.
Disclosure Requirement E1-9 – Anticipated financial effects from material physical and transition risks and potential
climate-related opportunities
Anticipated financial effects from material physical and transition risks
AR 67. Material climate-related physical risks and transition risks may affect the undertaking’s financial position (e.g.,
owned assets, financially-controlled leased assets, and liabilities), performance (e.g., potential
future increase/decrease in net revenue and costs due to business interruptions, increased supply prices resulting
in potential margin erosions), and cash flows. The low probability, high severity and long-term time horizons of
some climate- related physical risk exposures and the uncertainty arising from the transition to a sustainable
economy mean that there will be associated material anticipated financial effects that are outside the scope of
the requirements of applicable accounting standards.
106/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 68. Currently, there is no commonly accepted methodology to assess or measure how material physical risks and
transition risks may affect the undertaking’s future financial position, financial, performance and cash flows.
Therefore, the disclosure of the financial effects (as required by paragraphs 64, 66 and 67) will depend on the
undertaking’s internal methodology and the exercise of significant judgement in determining the inputs, and
assumptions needed to quantify their anticipated financial effects.
Calculation guidance - Anticipated financial effects from material physical risks
AR 69. When disclosing the information required under paragraphs 64 (a) and 66, the undertaking shall explain whether
and how:
(a) it assessed the anticipated financial effects for assets and business activities at material physical risk, including
the scope of application, time horizons, calculation methodology, critical assumptions and parameters and
limitations of the assessment; and
(b) the assessment of assets and business activities considered to be at material physical risk relies on or is part of
the process to determine material physical risk as required under paragraphs 20 (b) and AR 11 and to
determine climate scenarios as required under paragraphs 19 and AR 13 to AR 14. In particular, it shall
explain how it has defined medium- and long-term time horizons and how these definitions are linked to the
expected lifetime of the undertaking’s assets, strategic planning horizons and capital allocation plans.
AR 70. When preparing the information on assets at material physical risk that is required to be disclosed under paragraph
66 (a), the undertaking shall:
(a) Calculate the assets at material physical risk in terms of monetary amount and as a proportion (percentage) of
total assets at the reporting date (i.e., the proportion is an estimate of the carrying value of assets at material
physical risk divided by total carrying value as stated in the statement of financial position or balance sheet).
The estimate of assets at material physical risk shall be derived starting from the assets recognised in the
financial statements. The estimate of monetary amounts and proportion of assets at physical risk may be
presented as either a single amount or range.
(b) All types of assets including finance-lease / right-of-use assets shall be considered when determining the assets
at material physical risk.
(c) To contextualise this information, the undertaking shall:
i. disclose the location of its significant assets at material physical risk. Significant assets located(52)in the EU
territory shall be aggregated by NUTS codes 3 level digits (Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics).
For significant assets located outside EU territory, the breakdown by NUTS code will only be provided
where applicable.
ii. disaggregate the monetary amounts of assets at risk by acute and chronic physical risk(53).
(d) calculate the share of assets at material physical risk resulting from paragraph 66 (a) that is addressed by the
climate change adaptation actions based on the information disclosed under Disclosure Requirement E1-3.
This aims at approximating net risks.
AR 71. When preparing the information required under paragraph 64 (a) and 66 (d), the undertaking may assess and
disclose the share of net revenue from business activities at physical risk. This disclosure
(a) shall be based on the net revenue in line with the requirements in accounting standards applied for financial
statements, i.e., IFRS 15 or local GAAP.
(52) This disclosure requirement is consistent with the requirements of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2453 - Template
5 exposures subjects to physical risk.
(53) This disclosure requirement is consistent with the requirements of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2453 - Template
5 exposures subjects to physical risk.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 107/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) may include a breakdown of the undertaking’s business activities with the corresponding details of the
associated percentage of total net revenue, the risk factors (hazards, exposure and sensitivity) and, if possible,
the magnitude of the anticipated financial effects in terms of margin erosion over the short-, medium- and
long-term time horizons. The nature of business activities may also be disaggregated by operating segments if
the undertaking has disclosed the contribution of margins by operational segments in its segment reporting in
the financial statements.
Calculation guidance - Anticipated financial effects from transition risk
AR 72. When disclosing the information required under paragraphs 64 (b) and 67 (a), the undertaking shall explain
whether and how:
(a) it has assessed the potential effects on future financial performance and position for assets and business
activities at material transition risk, including the scope of application, calculation methodology, critical
assumptions and parameters, and limitations of the assessment; and
(b) the assessment of assets and business activities considered to be at material transition risk relies on or is part of
the process to determine material transition risks as described under paragraphs 20 (c) and AR 11 and to
determine scenarios as required under paragraphs AR 12 to AR 13. In particular, it shall explain how it has
defined medium- and long-term time horizons and how these definitions are linked to the expected lifetime
of the undertaking’s assets, strategic planning horizons and capital allocation plans.
AR 73. When disclosing the information on assets at material transition risk as required under paragraphs 67 (a) and (b):
(a) the undertaking shall at the very least include an estimate of the amount of potentially stranded assets (in
monetary amounts and as a proportion/percentage) from the reporting year until 2030 and from 2030 to
2050. Stranded assets are understood as the active or firmly planned key assets of the undertaking with
significant locked-in GHG emissions over their operating lifetime. Firmly planned key assets are those that
the undertaking will most likely deploy within the next 5 years. The amount may be expressed as a range of
asset values based on different climate and policy scenarios, including a scenario aligned with limiting climate
change to 1.5°C.
(b) the undertaking shall disclose a breakdown of the carrying value of its real estate assets, including rights-of-use
assets, by energy efficiency classes. The energy efficiency shall be represented in terms of either the ranges of
energy consumption in kWh/m2 or the EPC(54) (Energy Performance Certificate)(55) label class. If the
undertaking cannot obtain this information on a best-effort basis, it shall disclose the total carrying amount
of the real estate assets for which the energy consumption is based on internal estimates.
(c) the undertaking shall calculate the proportion (percentage) of total assets (including finance lease/right-of-use
assets) at material transition risk addressed by the climate change mitigation actions based on the information
disclosed under Disclosure Requirement E1-3. The total assets amount is the carrying amount on the balance
sheet at the reporting date.
AR 74. When disclosing the information on potential liabilities from material transition risks required under paragraph
67(d):
(a) undertakings that operate installations regulated under an emission trading scheme may include a range of
potential future liabilities originating from these schemes;
(b) undertakings subject to the EU ETS, may disclose the potential future liabilities that relate to their allocation
plans for the period before and until 2030. The potential liability may be estimated on the basis of:
(54) Directive 2010/31/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 May 2010 on the energy performance of buildings
(OJ L 153, 18.6.2010, p. 13).
(55) This disclosure requirement is consistent with the requirements of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2453 - Template
2 immovable property, energy efficiency of the collateral.
108/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
i. the number of allowances held by the undertaking at the beginning of the reporting period;
ii. the number of allowances to be purchased in the market yearly, i.e., before and until 2030;
iii. the gap between estimated future emissions under various transition scenarios and free allocations of
allowances that are known for the period until 2030, and
iv. the estimated yearly cost per tonne of CO2 for which an allowance needs to be purchased;
(c) In assessing its potential future liabilities, the undertaking may consider and disclose the number of Scope 1
GHG emission allowances within regulated emission trading schemes and the cumulative number of emission
allowances stored (from previous allowances) at the beginning of the reporting period;
(d) undertakings disclosing volumes of carbon credits planned to be cancelled in the near future (Disclosure
Requirement E1-7) may disclose the potential future liabilities associated with those based on existing
contractual agreements;
(e) the undertaking may also include its monetised gross Scope 1, 2 and total GHG emissions (in monetary units)
calculated as follows:
i. monetised Scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions in the reporting year by the following formula:
(a)
ii. monetised total GHG emissions in the reporting year by the following formula:
(b)
iii. by use of a lower, middle and upper cost rate(56) for GHG emissions (e.g., market carbon price and
different estimates for the societal costs of carbon) and reasons for selecting them.
AR 75. Other approaches and methodologies may be applied to assess how transition risks may affect the future financial
position of the undertaking. In any case, the disclosure of anticipated financial effects shall include a description
of the methodologies and definitions used by the undertaking.
AR 76. When preparing the information required under paragraph 67 (e), the undertaking may assess and disclose the
share of net revenue from business activities at transition risks. This disclosure:
(a) shall be based on the net revenue in line with the requirements in accounting standards applied for financial
statements, i.e., IFRS 15 or local GAAP.
(b) may include a breakdown of the undertaking’s business activities with the corresponding details of the
associated percentage of current net revenue, risk factors (events and exposure), and when possible, the
anticipated financial effects related to margin erosion over the short-, medium- and long-term. The nature of
business activities may also be disaggregated by operating segments if the undertaking has disclosed the
contribution of margins by operational segments in its segment reporting in the financial statements.
(56) The cost rate is the factor used to convert non-monetary impacts like tonnes, hectares, m3 etc. into monetary units. Cost rates should
be based on monetary valuation studies, need to be science-based and the methods used to obtain them transparent. Guidance on
these methods can be obtained, e.g., from the EU-LIFE-funded TRANSPARENT project.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 109/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Connectivity with financial reporting information
AR 77. The reconciliation of the significant amount of assets, liabilities, and net revenue (vulnerable to either material
physical risks or transition risks) to the relevant line item or disclosure (e.g., in segment reporting) in the
financial statements (as required by paragraph 68) may be presented by the undertaking as follows:
(a) as a cross-reference to the related line item or disclosure in the financial statements if these amounts are
identifiable in the financial statements; or
(b) If these cannot be directly cross-referenced, as a quantitative reconciliation of each to the relevant line item or
disclosure in the financial statement using the below tabular format:
Carrying amount of assets or liabilities or net revenue vulnerable to
either material physical or transition risks
Adjusting items
Assets or liabilities or net revenue in the financial statements
AR 78. The undertaking shall ensure the consistency of data and assumptions to assess and report the anticipated
financial effects from material physical risks and transition risks in the sustainability statement with the
corresponding data and assumptions used for the financial statements (e.g., carbon prices used for assessing
impairment of assets, the useful life of assets, estimates and provisions). The undertaking shall explain the reasons
for any inconsistencies (e.g., if the full financial implications of climate-related risks are still under assessment or
are not deemed material in the financial statements).
AR 79. For potential future effects on liabilities (as required by paragraph 67 (d)), if applicable, the undertaking shall cross-
reference the description of the emission trading schemes in the financial statements.
Climate-related opportunities
AR 80. When disclosing the information under paragraph 69 (a), the undertaking shall explain the nature of the cost
savings (e.g., from reduced energy consumption), the time horizons and the methodology used, including the
scope of the assessment, critical assumptions, and limitations, and whether and how scenario analysis was
applied.
AR 81. When disclosing the information required under paragraph 69 (b), the undertaking shall explain how it has
assessed the market size or any expected changes to net revenue from low-carbon products and services or
adaptation solutions including the scope of the assessment, the time horizon, critical assumptions, and limitations
and to what extent this market is accessible to the undertaking. The information on the market size may be put in
perspective to the current taxonomy-aligned revenue disclosed under the provisions of Regulation (EU) 2020/852.
The entity may also explain how it will pursue its climate-related opportunities and, where possible, this should be
linked to the disclosures on policies, targets and actions under Disclosure Requirements E1-2, E1-3 and E1-4.
110/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
ESRS E2
POLLUTION
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Objective
Interaction with other ESRS
Disclosure Requirements
– ESRS 2 General disclosures
Impact, risk and opportunity management
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify and assess
material pollution-related impacts, risks and opportunities
— Disclosure Requirement E2-1 – Policies related to pollution
— Disclosure Requirement E2-2 – Actions and resources related to pollution
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement E2-3 – Targets related to pollution
— Disclosure Requirement E2-4 – Pollution of air, water and soil
— Disclosure Requirement E2-5 – Substances of concern and substances of very high concern
— Disclosure Requirement E2-6 – Anticipated financial effects from pollution-related impacts, risks and
opportunities
Appendix A: Application Requirements
– ESRS 2 General disclosures
Impact, risk and opportunity management
— Disclosure Requirement E2-1 – Policies related to pollution
— Disclosure Requirement E2-2 – Actions and resources related to pollution
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement E2-3 – Targets related to pollution
— Disclosure Requirement E2-4 – Pollution of air, water and soil
— Disclosure Requirement E2-5 – Substances of concern and substances of very high concern
— Disclosure Requirement E2-6 – Anticipated financial effects from pollution-related, risks and opportunities
Objective
1. The objective of this Standard is to specify Disclosure Requirements which will enable users of the sustainability
statement to understand:
(a) how the undertaking affects pollution of air, water and soil, in terms of material positive and negative actual or
potential impacts;
(b) any actions taken, and the result of such actions, to prevent or mitigate actual or potential negative impacts, and
to address risks and opportunities;
(c) the plans and capacity of the undertaking to adapt its strategy and business model in line with the transition to a
sustainable economy and with the need to prevent, control and eliminate pollution. This is to create a toxic-free
environment with zero pollution also in support of the EU Action Plan “Towards a Zero Pollution for Air, Water
and Soil”;
(d) the nature, type and extent of the undertaking’s material risks and opportunities related to the undertaking’s
pollution-related impacts and dependencies, as well as the prevention, control, elimination or reduction of
pollution, including where this results from the application of regulations, and how the undertaking manages
this; and
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 111/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(e) the financial effects on the undertaking over the short-, medium- and long-term of material risks and
opportunities arising from the undertaking’s pollution-related impacts and dependencies.
2. This Standard sets out Disclosure Requirements related to the following sustainability matters: pollution of air,
water, soil, substances of concern, including substances of very high concern.
3. “Pollution of air” refers to the undertaking’s emissions into air (both indoor and outdoor), and prevention, control
and reduction of such emissions.
4. “Pollution of water” refers to the undertaking’s emissions to water, and prevention, control and reduction of such
emissions.
5. “Pollution of soil” refers to the undertaking’s emissions into soil and the prevention, control and reduction of such
emissions.
6. With regard to “substances of concern”, this standard covers the undertaking’s production, use and/or distribution
and commercialisation of substances of concern, including substances of very high concern. Disclosure
Requirements on substances of concern aim at providing users with an understanding of actual or potential impacts
related to such substances, also taking account of possible restrictions on their use and/or distribution and
commercialisation.
Interaction with other ESRS
7. The topic of pollution is closely connected to other environmental sub-topics such as climate change, water and
marine resources, biodiversity and circular economy. Thus, to provide a comprehensive overview of what could be
material to pollution, relevant Disclosure Requirements are covered in other environmental Standards as follows:
(a) ESRS E1 Climate change which addresses the following seven greenhouse gases connected to air pollution: carbon
dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs),
sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) and nitrogen trifluoride (NF3).
(b) ESRS E3 Water and marine resources which addresses water consumption, in particular in areas at water risk,
water recycling and storage. This also includes the responsible management of marine resources, including the
nature and quantity of marine resources-related commodities (such as gravels, deep-sea minerals, seafood) used
by the undertaking. This Standard covers the negative impacts, in terms of pollution of water and marine
resources, including microplastics, generated by such activities.
(c) ESRS E4 Biodiversity and ecosystems which addresses ecosystems and species. Pollution as a direct impact driver of
biodiversity loss is addressed by this Standard.
(d) ESRS E5 Resource use and circular economy which addresses, in particular, the transition away from extraction of
non-renewable resources and the implementation of practices that prevent waste generation, including
pollution generated by waste.
8. The undertaking’s pollution-related impacts may affect people and communities. Material negative impacts on
affected communities from pollution-related impacts attributable to the undertaking are covered in ESRS S3 Affected
communities.
9. This Standard should be read in conjunction with ESRS 1 General requirements and ESRS 2 General disclosures.
Disclosure Requirements
ESRS 2 General disclosures
10. The requirements of this section should be read in conjunction with and reported alongside the disclosures required
by ESRS 2 chapter 4 Impact, risk and opportunity management.
112/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify and assess material
pollution-related impacts, risks and opportunities
11. The undertaking shall describe the process to identify material impacts, risks and opportunities and shall provide
information on:
(a) whether the undertaking has screened its site locations and business activities in order to identify its actual and
potential pollution-related impacts, risks and opportunities in its own operations and upstream and
downstream value chain, and if so, the methodologies, assumptions and tools used in the screening;
(b) whether and how the undertaking has conducted consultations, in particular with affected communities.
Disclosure Requirement E2-1 – Policies related to pollution
12. The undertaking shall describe its policies adopted to manage its material impacts, risks and opportunities related to
pollution prevention and control.
13. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the extent to which the undertaking
has policies that address the identification, assessment, management and/or remediation of material pollution-
related impacts, risks and opportunities.
14. The disclosure required by paragraph 12 shall contain the information on the policies the undertaking has in place to
manage its material impacts, risks and opportunities related to pollution in accordance with ESRS 2 MDR-P Policies
adopted to manage material sustainability matters.
15. The undertaking shall indicate, with regard to its own operations and its upstream and donwstream value chain,
whether and how its policies address the following areas where material:
(a) mitigating negative impacts related to pollution of air, water and soil including prevention and control;
(b) substituting and minimising the use of substances of concern, and phasing out substances of very high concern,
in particular for non-essential societal use and in consumer products; and
(c) avoiding incidents and emergency situations, and if and when they occur, controlling and limiting their impact
on people and the environment.
Disclosure Requirement E2-2 – Actions and resources related to pollution
16. The undertaking shall disclose its pollution-related actions and the resources allocated to their implementation.
17. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the key actions taken and planned to
achieve the pollution-related policy objectives and targets.
18. The description of the pollution-related action plans and resources shall contain the information prescribed in ESRS
2 MDR-A Actions and resources in relation to material sustainability matters.
19. In addition to ESRS 2 MDR-A, the undertaking may specify to which layer in the following mitigation hierarchy an
action and resources can be allocated:
(a) avoid pollution including any phase out of materials or compounds that have a negative impact (prevention of
pollution at source);
(b) reduce pollution, including: any phase-out of materials or compounds; meeting enforcement requirements such
as Best Available Techniques (BAT) requirements; or meeting the Do No Significant Harm criteria for
pollution prevention and control according to the EU Taxonomy Regulation and its Delegated Acts
(minimisation of pollution); and
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 113/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(c) restore, regenerate and transform ecosystems where pollution has occurred (control of the impacts both from
regular activities and incidents).
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement E2-3 – Targets related to pollution
20. The undertaking shall disclose the pollution-related targets it has set.
21. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the targets the undertaking has set to
support its pollution-related policies and to address its material pollution-related impacts, risks and opportunities.
22. The description of targets shall contain the information requirements defined in ESRS 2 MDR-T Tracking effectiveness
of policies and actions through targets.
23. The disclosure required by paragraph 20 shall indicate whether and how its targets relate to the prevention and
control of:
(a) air pollutants and respective specific loads;
(b) emissions to water and respective specific loads;
(c) pollution to soil and respective specific loads; and
(d) substances of concern and substances of very high concern.
24. In addition to ESRS 2 MDR-T, the undertaking may specify whether ecological thresholds (e.g., the biosphere
integrity, stratospheric ozone-depletion, atmospheric aerosol loading, soil depletion, ocean acidification) and entity-
specific allocations were taken into consideration when setting targets. If so, the undertaking may specify:
(a) the ecological thresholds identified, and the methodology used to identify such thresholds;
(b) whether or not the thresholds are entity-specific and if so, how they were determined; and
(c) how responsibility for respecting identified ecological thresholds is allocated in the undertaking.
25. The undertaking shall specify as part of the contextual information, whether the targets that it has set and presented
are mandatory (required by legislation) or voluntary.
Disclosure Requirement E2-4 – Pollution of air, water and soil
26. The undertaking shall disclose the pollutants that it emits through its own operations, as well as the
microplastics it generates or uses.
27. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of the emissions that the undertaking
generates to air, water and soil in its own operations, and of its generation and use of microplastics.
28. The undertaking shall disclose the amounts of:
(a) each pollutant listed in Annex II of Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 of the European Parliament and of the
Council(57)(European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register “E-PRTR Regulation”)emitted to air, water and soil,
with the exception of emissions of GHGs which are disclosed in accordance with ESRS E1 Climate Change(58);
(57) Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 January 2006 concerning the establishment of a
European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register and amending Council Directives 91/689/EEC and 96/61/EC (OJ L 033 4.2.2006,
p. 1)
(58) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from: (a) an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #2 in Table II of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Emissions of air
pollutants”); (b) indicator #8 in Table I of Annex I (“Emissions to water); (c) indicator #1 in Table II of Annex I ( “Emissions of
inorganic pollutants”); and (d) indicator #3 in Table II of Annex I (“Emissions of ozone- depleting substances”) .
114/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) microplastics generated or used by the undertaking.
29. The amounts referred in paragraph 28 shall be consolidated amounts including the emissions from those facilities
over which the undertaking has financial control and those over which it has operational control. The consolidation
shall include only the emissions from facilities for which the applicable threshold value specified in Annex II of
Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 is exceeded.
30. The undertaking shall put its disclosure into context and describe:
(a) the changes over time,
(b) the measurement methodologies; and
(c) the process(es) to collect data for pollution-related accounting and reporting, including the type of data needed
and the information sources.
31. When an inferior methodology compared to direct measurement of emissions is chosen to quantify emissions, the
reasons for choosing this inferior methodology shall be outlined by the undertaking. If the undertaking uses
estimates, it shall disclose the standard, sectoral study or sources which form the basis of its estimates, as well as the
possible degree of uncertainty and the range of estimates reflecting the measurement uncertainty.
Disclosure Requirement E2-5 – Substances of concern and substances of very high concern
32. The undertaking shall disclose information on the production, use, distribution, commercialisation
and import/export of substances of concern and substances of very high concern, on their own, in
mixtures or in articles.
33. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the impact of the undertaking on
health and the environment through substances of concern and through substances of very high concern on their
own. It is also to enable an understanding of the undertaking’s material risks and opportunities, including exposure
to those substances and risks arising from changes in regulations.
34. The disclosure required by paragraph 32 shall include the total amounts of substances of concern that are generated
or used during the production or that are procured, and the total amounts of substances of concern that leave its
facilities as emissions, as products, or as part of products or services split into main hazard classes of substances of
concern.
35. The undertaking shall present separately the information for substances of very high concern.
Disclosure Requirement E2-6 – Anticipated financial effects from material pollution-related risks and opportunities
36. The undertaking shall disclose the anticipated financial effects of material pollution-related risks and
opportunities.
37. The information required by paragraph 36 is in addition to the information on current financial effects on the
undertaking’s, financial position, financial performance and cash flows for the reporting period required under ESRS
2 SBM-3 para 48 (d).
38. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of:
(a) anticipated financial effects due to material risks arising from pollution-related impacts and dependencies and
how these risks have (or could reasonably be expected to have) a material influence on the undertaking’s ,
financial position financial performance and cash flows, over the short-, medium- and long-term.
(b) anticipated financial effects due to material opportunities related to pollution prevention and control.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 115/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
39. The disclosure shall include:
(a) a quantification of the anticipated financial effects in monetary terms before considering pollution-related
actions, or where not possible without undue cost or effort, qualitative information. For financial effects arising
from opportunities, a quantification is not required if it would result in disclosure that does not meet the
qualitative characteristics of information (see ESRS 1 Appendix B Qualitative characteristics of information);
(b) a description of the effects considered, the related impacts and the time horizons in which they are likely to
materialise; and
(c) the critical assumptions used to quantify the anticipated financial effects, as well as the sources and level of
uncertainty of those assumptions.
40. The information provided under paragraph 38(a) shall include:
(a) the share of net revenue made with products and services that are or that contain substances of concern, and the
share of net revenue made with products and services that are or that contain substances of very high concern;
(b) the operating and capital expenditures incurred in the reporting period in conjunction with major incidents and
deposits;
(c) the provisions for environmental protection and remediation costs, e.g., for rehabilitating contaminated sites,
recultivating landfills, removal of environmental contamination at existing production or storage sites and
similar measures.
41. The undertaking shall disclose any relevant contextual information including a description of material incidents and
deposits whereby pollution had negative impacts on the environment and/or is expected to have negative effects on
the undertaking’s financial cash flows, financial position and financial performance with short-, medium- and long-
term time horizons.
116/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix A
Application Requirements
This Appendix is an integral part of ESRS E2. It supports the application of the disclosure requirements set out in this
standard and has the same authority as the other parts of the Standard.
ESRS 2 GENERAL DISCLOSURES
Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify and assess material
pollution-related impacts, risks and opportunities
AR 1. When conducting a materiality assessment on environmental subtopics, the undertaking shall assess the
materiality of pollution in its own operations and its upstream and downstream value chain, and may consider
the four phases below, also known as the LEAP approach:
(a) Phase 1: locate where in its own operations and its upstream and downstream value chain the interface with
nature takes place;
(b) Phase 2: evaluate the pollution-related dependencies and impacts;
(c) Phase 3: assess the material risks and opportunities; and
(d) Phase 4: prepare and report the results of the materiality assessment.
AR 2. The materiality assessment for ESRS E2 corresponds to the first three phases of this LEAP approach. The fourth
phase addresses the outcome of the process.
AR 3. The process to assess the materiality of impacts, dependencies, risks and opportunities shall consider the
provisions in ESRS 2 IRO-1 Description of the processes to identify and assess material impacts, risks and opportunities,
and IRO-2 Disclosure Requirements in ESRS covered by the undertaking’s sustainability statement.
AR 4. The sub-topics covered by the materiality assessment under ESRS E2 include:
(a) pollution of air, water and soil (excluding GHG emissions and waste), microplastics, and substances of
concern;
(b) dependencies on ecosystem services that help to mitigate pollution-related impacts.
AR 5. In Phase 1, to locate where in its own operations and its upstream and downstream value chain the interface with
nature takes place, the undertaking may consider:
(a) the site locations of direct assets and operations and related upstream and downstream activities across the
value chain;
(b) the site locations where emissions of water, soil and air pollutants occur; and
(c) the sectors or business units related to those emissions or to the production, use, distribution, commercia­
lisation and import/export of microplastics, substances of concern, and substances of very high concern, on
their own, in mixtures or in articles.
AR 6. Phase 2 relates to the evaluation of the undertaking’s impacts and dependencies for each material site
or sector/business unit including by assessing the severity and likelihood of impacts on the environment and
human health.
AR 7. In Phase 3, to assess its material risks and opportunities based on the results of Phases 1 and 2, the undertaking
may :
(a) identify transition risks and opportunities in its own operations and its upstream and downstream value
chain by the categories of:
i. policy and legal: e.g., introduction of regulation, exposure to sanctions and litigation (e.g., negligence
towards ecosystems), enhanced reporting obligations;
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 117/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
ii. technology: e.g., substitution of products or services by products or services with a lower impact,
transition away from substances of concern;
iii. market: e.g., shifting supply, demand and financing, volatility or increased costs of some substances; and
iv. reputation: e.g., changing societal, customer or community perceptions as a result of an organisation’s role
in pollution prevention and control;
(b) identify physical risks, e.g., sudden interruption of access to clean water, acid rain, or other pollution incidents
that are likely to lead to or that have led to pollution with subsequent effects on the environment and society;
(c) identify opportunities related to pollution prevention and control categorised by:
i. resource efficiency: decrease quantities of substances used or improve efficiency of production process to
minimise impacts;
ii. markets: e.g., diversification of business activities;
iii. financing: e.g., access to green funds, bonds or loans;
iv. resilience: e.g., diversification of substances used and control of emissions through innovation or
technology; and
v. reputation: positive stakeholder relations as a result of a proactive stance on managing risks.
AR 8. In order to assess materiality, the undertaking may consider Commission Recommendation (EU) 2021/2279 on
the use of the Environmental Footprint methods to measure and communicate the life cycle environmental
performance of products and organisations.
AR 9. When providing information on the outcome of its materiality assessment, the undertaking shall consider:
(a) a list of site locations where pollution is a material issue for the undertaking’s own operations and its upstream
and downstream value chain; and
(b) a list of business activities associated with pollution material impacts, risks and opportunities.
Disclosure Requirement E2-1 – Policies related to pollution
AR 10. The policies described under this Disclosure Requirement may be integrated in broader environmental or
sustainability policies covering different subtopics.
AR 11. The description of the policies shall include information on the pollutant(s) or substance(s) covered.
AR 12. When disclosing information under paragraph 11, the undertaking may include contextual information on the
relations between its policies implemented and how they may contribute to the EU Action Plan “Towards a Zero
Pollution for Air, Water and Soil” with for instance elements on:
(a) how it is or may be affected by the targets and measures of the EU Action Plan and the revision of existing
directives (e.g., the Industrial Emissions Directive);
(b) how it intends to reduce its pollution footprint to contribute to these targets.
Disclosure Requirement E2-2 – Actions and resources related to pollution
AR 13. Where actions extend to upstream or downstream value chain engagements, the undertaking shall provide
information on the types of actions reflecting these engagements.
AR 14. When considering resources, examples of operational expenditures could be investments in research and
development to innovate and develop safe and sustainable alternatives to the use of substances of concern or to
decrease emissions in a production process.
118/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 15. Where relevant to achieve its pollution-related policy objectives and targets, the undertaking may provide
information on site-level action plans.
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement E2-3 – Targets related to pollution
AR 16. If the undertaking refers to ecological thresholds when setting targets, it may refer to the guidance provided by the
Science-Based Targets Initiative for Nature (SBTN) in its interim guidance (Initial Guidance for Business, September
2020), or any other guidance with a scientifically acknowledged methodology that allows setting of science-based
targets by identifying ecological thresholds and, if applicable, entity-specific allocations. Ecological thresholds can
be local, national and/or global.
AR 17. The undertaking may specify whether the target addresses shortcomings related to the Substantial Contribution
criteria for Pollution Prevention and Control as defined in delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 14(2) of
Regulation (EU) 2020/852. Where the Do No Significant Harm (DNSH) criteria for Pollution Prevention and
Control as defined in delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 10(3), Article 11(3), Article 12(2), Article 13(2),
and Article 15(2) of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 are not met, the undertaking may specify whether the target
addresses shortcomings related those DNSH critera.
AR 18. Where relevant to support the policies it has adopted, the undertaking may provide information on the targets set
at site level.
AR 19. The targets may cover the undertaking’s own operations and/or the value chain.
Disclosure Requirement E2-4 – Pollution of air, water and soil
AR 20. The information to be provided on microplastics under paragraph 28(b) shall include microplastics that have been
generated or used during production processes or that are procured, and that leave the undertaking’s facilities as
emissions, as products, or as part of products or services. Microplastics may be unintentionally produced when
larger pieces of plastics like car tires or synthetic textiles wear and tear or may be deliberately manufactured and
added to products for specific purposes (e.g., exfoliating beads in facial or body scrubs).
AR 21. The volume of pollutants shall be presented in appropriate mass units, for example tonnes or kilogrammes.
AR 22. The information required under this Disclosure Requirement shall be provided at the level of the reporting
undertaking. However, the undertaking may disclose additional breakdown including information at site level or a
breakdown of its emissions by type of source, by sector or by geographical area.
AR 23. When providing contextual information on the emissions, the undertaking may consider:
(a) the local air quality indices (AQI) for the area where the undertaking’s air pollution occurs;
(b) the degree of urbanisation (DEGURBA)(59)for the area where air pollution occurs; and
(c) the undertaking’s percentage of the total emissions of pollutants to water and soil occurring in areas at water
risk, including areas of high-water stress.
(59) According to Eurostat, the Degree of urbanisation (DEGURBA) is a classification that indicates the character of an area. Based on the
share of local population living in urban clusters and in urban centres, it classifies Local Administrative Units (LAU or communes)
into three types of area: i) Cities (densely populated areas), ii) Towns and suburbs (intermediate density areas), and iii) Rural areas
(thinly populated areas).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 119/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 24. The information provided under this Disclosure Requirement may refer to information the undertaking is already
required to report under other existing legislation (i.e., IED, E- PRTR, etc.).
AR 25. Where the undertaking’s activities are subject to Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the
Council on industrial emissions (IED)(60) and relevant Best Available Techniques Reference Documents (BREFs),
irrespective of whether the activity takes place within the European Union or not, the undertaking may disclose
the following additional information:
(a) a list of installations operated by the undertaking that fall under the IED and EU- BAT Conclusions;
(b) a list of any non-compliance incidents or enforcement actions necessary to ensure compliance in case of
breaches of permit conditions;
(c) the actual performance, as specified in the EU-BAT conclusions for industrial installations, and comparison
of the undertaking’s environmental performance against “emission levels associated with the best available
techniques” the (BAT-AEL) as described in EU-BAT conclusions;
(d) the actual performance of the undertaking against “environmental performance levels associated with the best
available techniques” (BAT-AEPLs) provided that they are applicable to the sector and installation; and
(e) a list of any compliance schedules or derogations granted by competent authorities according to Art. 15(4)
Directive 2010/75/EU that are associated with the implementation of BAT-AELs.
Methodologies
AR 26. When providing information on pollutants, the undertaking shall consider approaches for quantification in the
following order of priority:
(a) direct measurement of emissions, effluents or other pollution through the use of recognised continuous
monitoring systems (e.g., AMS Automated Measuring Systems);
(b) periodic measurements;
(c) calculation based on site-specific data;
(d) calculation based on published pollution factors; and
(e) estimation.
AR 27. Regarding the disclosure of methodologies required by paragraph 30, the undertaking shall consider:
(a) whether its monitoring is carried out in accordance with EU BREF Standards or another relevant reference
benchmark; and
(b) whether and how the calibration tests of the AMS were undertaken and the verification of periodic
measurement by independent labs were ensured.
Disclosure Requirement E2-5 – Substances of concern and substances of very high concern
List of substances to be considered
AR 28. In order for the information to be complete, substances in the undertaking’s own operations and those procured
shall be included (e.g., embedded in ingredients, semi- finished products, or the final product).
AR 29. The volume of pollutants shall be presented in mass units, for example tonnes or kilogrammes or other mass units
appropriate for the volumes and type of pollutants being released.
(60) Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated
pollution prevention and control) (OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17).
120/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Contextual information
AR 30. The information provided under this Disclosure Requirement may refer to information the undertaking is already
required to report under other existing legislation (i.e., Directive 2010/75/EU, Regulation (EC) No 166/2006
“E-PRTR”, etc.).
Disclosure Requirement E2-6 – Anticipated financial effects from material pollution-related risks and opportunities
AR 31. The operating and capital expenditures related to incidents and deposits may include for instance:
(a) cost for eliminating and remediating the respective pollution of air, water and soil including environmental protection;
(b) damage compensation costs including payment of fines and penalties imposed by regulators or government authorities.
AR 32. Incidents may include for instance interruptions of production, whether arising from the supply chain and/or
from own operations, which resulted in pollution.
AR 33. The undertaking may include an assessment of its related products and services at risk over the short-, medium-
and long-term, explaining how these are defined, how financial amounts are estimated, and which critical
assumptions are made.
AR 34. The quantification of the anticipated financial effects in monetary terms under paragraph 38(a) may be a single
amount or a range.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 121/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
ESRS E3
WATER AND MARINE RESOURCES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Objective
Interaction with other ESRS
Disclosure requirements
– ESRS 2 General disclosures
Impact, risk and opportunity management
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify and assess
material water and marine resources-related impacts, risks and opportunities
— Disclosure Requirement E3-1 – Policies related to water and marine resources
— Disclosure Requirement E3-2 – Actions and resources related to water and marine resources
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement E3-3 – Targets related to water and marine resources
— Disclosure Requirement E3-4 – Water consumption
— Disclosure Requirement E3-5 – Anticipated financial effects from water and marine resources-related
impacts, risks and opportunities
Appendix A: Application Requirements
– ESRS 2 General disclosures
Impact, risk and opportunity management
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify and assess
material water and marine resources-related impacts, risks and opportunities
— Disclosure Requirement E3-1 – Policies related to water and marine resources
122/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
— Disclosure Requirement E3-2 – Actions and resources related to water and marine resources policies
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement E3-3 – Targets related to water and marine resources
— Disclosure Requirement E3-4 – Water consumption
— Disclosure Requirement E3-5 – Anticipated financial effects from water and marine resources-related risks
and opportunities
Objective
1. The objective of this Standard is to specify Disclosure Requirements which will enable users of the sustainability
statement to understand:
(a) how the undertaking affects water and marine resources, in terms of material positive and negative actual or
potential impacts;
(b) any actions taken, and the result of such actions to prevent or mitigate material actual or potential negative
impacts, to protect water and marine resources, also with reference to reduction of water consumption, and to
address risks and opportunities;
(c) whether, how and to what extent the undertaking contributes to the European Green Deal’s ambitions for fresh
air, clean water, healthy soil and biodiversity, as well as to the sustainability of the blue economy and fisheries
sectors, taking account of the following: Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council(61) (EU Water Framework Directive), Directive 2008/56/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council(62) (EU Marine Strategy Framework Directive), Directive 2014/89/EU of the European Parliament and
of the Council(63) (EU Maritime Spatial Planning Directive), the Sustainable Development Goals (in particular
SDG 6 Clean water and sanitation and 14 Life below water), and respect of global environmental limits (e.g.
biosphere integrity, ocean acidification, freshwater use, and biogeochemical flows planetary boundaries);
(d) the plans and capacity of the undertaking to adapt its strategy and business model in line with the promotion of
sustainable water use based on long-term protection of available water resources; protection of aquatic
ecosystems and restoration of freshwater and marine habitats;
(e) the nature, type and extent of the undertaking’s material risks and opportunities arising from the undertaking’s
impacts and dependencies on water and marine resources, and how the undertaking manages them; and
(f) the financial effects on the undertaking over the short-, medium- and long-term of material risks and
opportunities arising from the undertaking’s impacts and dependencies on water and marine resources.
2. This Standard sets out Disclosure Requirements related to water and marine resources. With regard to “water”, this
standard covers surface water and groundwater. It includes disclosure requirements on water consumption in the
undertaking’s activities, products and services, as well as related information on water withdrawals and water
discharges.
3. With regard to “marine resources”, this standard covers the extraction and use of such resources, and associated
economic activities.
(61) Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a framework for Community
action in the field of water policy (Water Framework Directive) (OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, p. 1).
(62) Directive 2008/56/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 June 2008 establishing a framework for community
action in the field of marine environmental policy (Marine Strategy Framework Directive) (OJ L 164, 25.6.2008, p. 19).
(63) Directive 2014/89/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 July 2014 establishing a framework for maritime spatial
planning (OJ L 257, 28.8.2014, p. 135).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 123/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Interaction with other ESRS
4. The topic of water and marine resources is closely connected to other environmental sub- topics such as climate
change, pollution, biodiversity and circular economy. Thus, to provide a comprehensive overview of what could be
material to water and marine resources, relevant Disclosure Requirements are covered in other environmental ESRS
as follows:
(a) ESRS E1 Climate change, which addresses, in particular, acute and chronic physical risks which arise from water
and ocean-related hazards caused or exacerbated by climate change, including increasing water temperature,
changing precipitation patterns and types (rain, hail, snow/ice), precipitation or hydrological variability, ocean
acidification, saline intrusion, sea level rise, drought, high water stress, heavy precipitation, flood and glacial lake
outbursts;
(b) ESRS E2 Pollution, which addresses, in particular, the emissions to water, which includes emissions to oceans, and
the use and generation of microplastics;
(c) ESRS E4 Biodiversity and ecosystems, which addresses, in particular, the conservation and sustainable use of and
impact on freshwater aquatic ecosystems as well as the oceans and seas; and
(d) ESRS E5 Resource use and circular economy which addresses in particular waste management including plastic, and
the transition towards the extraction of non-renewable resources of wastewater; reduced use of plastic; and the
recycling of wastewater.
5. The undertaking’s impacts on water and marine resources affect people and communities. Material negative impacts
on affected communities from water and marine resources-related impacts attributable to the undertaking are
covered in ESRS S3 Affected communities.
6. This Standard should be read in conjunction with ESRS 1 General requirements and ESRS 2 General disclosures.
Disclosure requirements
ESRS 2 General disclosures
7. The requirements of this section should be read in conjunction with and reported alongside the disclosures required
by ESRS 2 chapter 4 Impact, risk and opportunity management.
Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify and assess material water
and marine resources-related impacts, risks and opportunities
8. The undertaking shall describe the process to identify material impacts, risks and opportunities and shall provide
information on:
(a) whether and how the undertaking it has screened its assets and activities in order to identify its actual and
potential water and marine resources-related impacts, risks and opportunities in its own operations and its
upstream and downstream value chain, and if so the methodologies, assumptions and tools used in the
screening;
(b) whether and how it has conducted consultations, in particular, with affected communities(64).
(64) Source: IFC Performance Standard 6, 2012.
124/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Disclosure Requirement E3-1 – Policies related to water and marine resources
9. The undertaking shall describe its policies adopted to manage its material impacts, risks and opportunities related to
water and marine resources(65).
10. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the extent to which the undertaking
has policies that address the identification, assessment, management and/or remediation of its material water and
marine resources-related impacts, risks and opportunities.
11. The disclosure required by paragraph 9 shall contain the information on the policies the undertaking has in place to
manage its material impacts, risks and opportunities related to water and marine resources in accordance with ESRS
2 MDR-P Policies adopted to manage material sustainability matters.
12. The undertaking shall indicate whether and how its policies address the following matters where material:
(a) water management including:
i. the use and sourcing of water and marine resources in its own operations;
ii. water treatment as a step towards more sustainable sourcing of water; and
iii. the prevention and abatement of water pollution resulting from its activities.
(b) product and service design in view of addressing water-related issues and the preservation of marine resources;
and
(c) commitment to reduce material water consumption in areas at water risk in its own operations and along the
upstream and downstream value chain.
13. If at least one of the sites of the undertaking is located in an area of high-water stress and it is not covered by a policy,
the undertaking shall state this to be the case and provide reasons for not having adopted such a policy. The
undertaking may disclose a timeframe in which it aims to adopt such a policy.(66)
14. The undertaking shall specify whether it has adopted policies or practices related to sustainable oceans and seas(67).
Disclosure Requirement E3-2 – Actions and resources related to water and marine resources
15. The undertaking shall disclose its water and marine resources-related actions and the resources allocated to
their implementation.
16. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the key actions taken and planned to
achieve the water and marine resources-related policy objectives and targets.
17. The description of the actions and resources shall follow the principles defined in ESRS 2 MDR-A Actions and resources
in relation to material sustainability matters. In addition to ESRS 2 MDR-A, the undertaking may specify to which layer in
the mitigation hierarchy an action and
(65) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #7 in Table II of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Investments in
companies without water management policies”).
(66) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #8 in Table II of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Exposure to areas of
high water stress”).
(67) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #12 in Table II of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments ( “Investments in
companies without sustainable oceans/seas practices”).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 125/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
18. Resources can be allocated to:
(a) avoid the use of water and marine resources;
(b) reduce the use of water and marine resources such as through efficiency measures;
(c) reclaiming and reuse of water; or
(d) restoration and regeneration of aquatic ecosystem and water bodies.
19. The undertaking shall specify actions and resources in relation to areas at water risk, including areas of high-water
stress.
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement E3-3 – Targets related to water and marine resources
20. The undertaking shall disclose the water and marine resources-related targets it has set.
21. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the targets the undertaking has
adopted to support its water and marine resources-related policies and address its material water and marine
resources-related impacts, risks and opportunities.
22. The description of the targets shall contain the information requirements defined in ESRS 2 MDR-T Tracking
effectiveness of policies and actions through targets.
23. The disclosure required by paragraph 20 shall indicate whether and how its targets relate to:
(a) the management of material impacts, risks and opportunities related to areas at water risk, including
improvement of the water quality;
(b) the responsible management of marine resources impacts, risks and opportunities including the nature and
quantity of marine resources-related commodities (such as gravels, deep-sea minerals, seafood) used by the
undertaking; and
(c) the reduction of water consumption, including an explanation of how those targets relate to areas at water risk,
including areas of high water-stress.
24. In addition to ESRS 2 MDR-T, the undertaking may specify whether ecological thresholds and entity-specific
allocations were taken into consideration when setting targets. If so, the undertaking may specify:
(a) the ecological thresholds identified, and the methodology used to identify such thresholds;
(b) whether or not the thresholds are entity-specific and if so, how they were determined; and
(c) how responsibility for respecting identified ecological thresholds is allocated in the undertaking.
25. The undertaking shall specify as part of the contextual information, whether the targets it has set and presented are
mandatory (required by legislation) or voluntary.
Disclosure Requirement E3-4 – Water consumption
26. The undertaking shall disclose information on its water consumption performance related to its material impacts,
risks and opportunities.
27. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of the undertaking’s water consumption
and any progress by the undertaking in relation to its targets.
28. The disclosure required by paragraph 26 relates to own operations and shall include:
(a) total water consumption in m3;
(b) total water consumption in m3 in areas at water risk, including areas of high-water stress;
126/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(c) total water recycled and reused in m3;(68)
(d) total water stored and changes in storage in m3; and
(e) any contextual information necessary regarding points (a) to (d), including the water basins’ water quality and
quantity, how the data have been compiled, such as any standards, methodologies, and assumptions used,
including whether the information is calculated, estimated, modelled, or sourced from direct measurements, and
the approach taken for this, such as the use of any sector-specific factors.
29. The undertaking shall provide information on its water intensity: total water consumption in its own operations in
m3 per million EUR net revenue(69).
Disclosure Requirement E3-5 – Anticipated financial effects from material water and marine resources-related risks and
opportunities
30. The undertaking shall disclose the anticipated financial effects of material water and marine resources-related risks
and opportunities.
31. The information required by paragraph 30 is in addition to the information on current financial effects on the entity’s
financial position, financial performance and cash flows for the reporting period required under ESRS 2 SBM-3 para
48 (d).
32. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of:
(a) anticipated financial effects due to material risks arising from water and marine resources-related impacts and
dependencies and how these risks have (or could reasonably be expected to have) a material influence on the
undertaking’s financial position, financial performance and cash flows, over the short-, medium- and long-term;
and
(b) anticipated financial effects due to material opportunities related to water and marine resources.
33. The disclosure shall include:
(a) a quantification of the anticipated financial effects in monetary terms before considering water and marine
resources-related actions or where not possible without undue cost or effort, qualitative information. For
financial effects arising from opportunities, a quantification is not required if it would result in disclosure that
does not meet the qualitative characteristics of information (see ESRS 1 Appendix B Qualitative characteristics of
information);
(b) a description of the effects considered, the impacts and dependencies to which they relate, and the time horizons
in which they are likely to materialise; and
(c) the critical assumptions used to quantify the anticipated financial effects, as well as the sources and level of
uncertainty of those assumptions.
(68) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #6.2 in Table II of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 regarding disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Water usage and
recycling”, 2. Weighted average percentage of water recycled and reused by investee companies).
(69) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #6.1 in Table II of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Water usage and
recycling”, 1. Average amount of water consumed by the investee companies (in cubic meters) per million EUR of revenue of investee
companies).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 127/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix A
Application Requirements
This appendix is an integral part of the ESRS E3. It supports the application of the disclosure requirements set out in this
standard and has the same authority as the other parts of the Standard.
ESRS 2 GENERAL DISCLOSURES
Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify and assess material water
and marine resources-related impacts, risks and opportunities
AR 1. When conducting a materiality assessment on environmental subtopics, the undertaking shall assess the
materiality of water and marine resources in its own operations and its upstream and downstream value chain,
and may consider the four phases below, also known as the LEAP approach:
(a) Phase 1: locate where in its own operations and along the value chain the interface with nature takes place;
(b) Phase 2: evaluate the dependencies and impacts;
(c) Phase 3: assess the material risks and opportunities; and
(d) Phase 4: prepare and report the results of the materiality assessment.
AR 2. The materiality assessment for ESRS E3 corresponds to the first three phases of this LEAP approach, the fourth
phase addresses the outcome of the process.
AR 3. The processes to assess the materiality of impacts, risks and opportunities shall consider the provisions in ESRS 2
IRO-1 Description of the processes to identify and assess material impacts, risks and opportunities, and IRO-2 Disclosure
Requirements in ESRS covered by the undertaking’s sustainability statement.
AR 4. The sub-topics related to water and marine resources covered by the materiality assessment include:
(a) water, which encompasses the consumption of surface water, groundwater, as well as withdrawals and
discharges of water; and
(b) marine resources, which encompasses the extraction and use of such resources and associated economic
activities.
AR 5. In phase 1, to locate where there are areas at water risk, and areas where there is an interface with marine resources
that could lead to material impacts and dependencies in its own operations and along its upstream and
downstream value chain, the undertaking may consider:
(a) the locations of direct assets and operations and related upstream and downstream activities across the value
chain;
(b) the sites located in areas at water risk, including areas of high-water stress; and
(c) the sectors or business units that are interfacing with water or marine resources in these priority locations.
AR 6. The undertaking shall consider river basins as the relevant level for assessment of locations and combine that
approach with an operational risk assessment of its facilities and the facilities of suppliers with material impacts
and risks.
AR 7. The undertaking shall consider the criteria for defining the status of water bodies according to the relevant
Annexes of Directive 2000/60/EC (Water Framework Directive) as well as the guidance documents provided for
implementation of the Water Framework Directive. The list of guidance documents can be accessed under the
European Commission’s Environment home page.
128/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 8. In phase 2, to evaluate its impacts and dependencies for each priority location identified under AR 5, the
undertaking may:
(a) identify business processes and activities that lead to impacts and dependencies on environmental assets and
ecosystem services;
(b) identify water and marine resources-related impacts and dependencies across the undertaking’s value chain;
and
(c) assess the severity and likelihood of the positive and negative impacts on water and marine resources.
AR 9. For the identification of water and marine resources-related dependencies, the undertaking may rely on
international classifications such as the Common International Classification of Ecosystem Services (CICES).
AR 10. When identifying its marine resources-related dependencies, the undertaking shall consider if it depends upon key
marine resources-related commodities, including but not limited to gravels and seafood products.
AR 11. Marine resources are defined according to their use by human societies and must be considered in relation to the
pressure they are subject to. Some of the pressure indicators are presented in other ESRS, namely microplastics
and emissions to water in ESRS E2 and plastic waste in ESRS E5.
AR 12. Examples of marine resources dependencies which may be considered by the undertaking are:
(a) dependencies on commercially exploited fish and shellfish in its own operations and its upstream and
downstream value chain; and
(b) fishing activity that involves mobile bottom trawling, which can also have negative impacts on the seabed.
AR 13. In Phase 3, to assess its material risks and opportunities based on the results of Phases 1 and 2, the undertaking
may :
(a) identify transition risks and opportunities in its own operations and its value chain by the categories of:
i. policy and legal: e.g., introduction of regulation or policy (e.g., changes such as increased water protection,
increased quality of water regulations, regulation of flows of water supply), ineffective governance of water
bodies or marine resources, in particular across boundaries (e.g., transboundary governance and
cooperation) resulting in water or oceans degradation, exposure to sanctions and litigation (e.g., non-
respect of permits or allocations; negligence towards or killing of threatened marine species), enhanced
reporting obligations on marine ecosystems and related services;
ii. technology: e.g., substitution of products or services by products or services with a lower impact on water
and marine resources, transition to more efficient and cleaner technologies (i.e., with lower impacts on
oceans and water), new monitoring technologies (e.g., satellite), water purification, flood protection;
iii. market: e.g., shifting supply, demand and financing, volatility or increased costs of water or marine
resources;
iv. reputation: e.g., changing societal, customer or community perceptions as a result of an organisation’s
impact on water and marine resources; and
v. contribution to systemic risks via its own operations and its upstream and downstream value chain,
including the risks that a marine ecosystem collapses or the risks that a critical natural system no longer
functions (e.g., tipping points are reached, summing physical risks);
(b) identify physical risk including water quantity (water scarcity, water stress), water quality, infrastructure decay
or unavailability of some marine resources-related commodities (e.g. the rarefaction of some species of fish or
other underwater marine living organisms sold as products by the undertaking) leading for instance to the
impossibility of running operations in certain geographical areas;
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 129/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(c) identify opportunities categorised by:
i. resource efficiency: e.g., transition to more efficient services and processes requiring less water and marine
resources;
ii. markets: e.g., development of less resource-intense products and services, diversification of business
activities;
iii. financing: e.g., access to green funds, bonds or loans;
iv. resilience: e.g., diversification of marine or water resources and business activities (e.g., starting a new
business unit on ecosystem restoration), investing in green infrastructures, nature-based solutions,
adopting recycling and circularity mechanisms that reduce the dependencies on water or marine
resources; and
v. reputation: positive stakeholder engagement as a result of a proactive stance on managing nature-related
risks (e.g., leading to preferred partner status).
AR 14. The undertaking may rely on primary, secondary or modelled data collection or other relevant approaches to
assess material impacts, dependencies, risks and opportunities, including Commission
Recommendation 2021/2279 on the use of the Environmental Footprint methods to measure and communicate
the life cycle environmental performance of products and organisations (Annex I – Product Environmental
Footprint; Annex III – Organisation Environmental Footprint).
AR 15. When providing information on the outcome of the materiality assessment, the undertaking shall consider:
(a) a list of geographical areas where water is a material issue for the undertaking’s own operations and its
upstream and downstream value chain;
(b) a list of marine resources-related commodities used by the undertaking which are material to the good
environmental status of marine waters as well as for the protection of marine resources; and
(c) a list of sectors or segments associated with water and marine resources material impacts, risks and
opportunities.
Disclosure Requirement E3-1 – Policies related to water and marine resources
AR 16. The policies described under this Disclosure Requirement may be integrated in broader environmental or
sustainability policies covering different subtopics.
AR 17. When disclosing information under paragraph 9, the undertaking may disclose whether its policies :
(a) prevent further deterioration and protect and enhance the status of water bodies and aquatic ecosystems;
(b) promote sustainable water use based on a long-term protection of available water resources;
(c) aim at enhanced protection and improvement of the aquatic environment;
(d) promote a good environmental status of marine water; and
(e) promote reduction of water withdrawals and water discharges.
AR 18. The undertaking may also disclose information about policies which:
(a) contribute to good ecological and chemical quality of surface water bodies and good chemical quality and
quantity of groundwater bodies, in order to protect human health, water supply, natural ecosystems and
biodiversity, the good environmental status of marine waters and the protection of the resource base upon
which marine related activities depend;
(b) minimise material impacts and risks and implement mitigation measures that aim to maintain the value and
functionality of priority services and to increase resource efficiency on own operations; and
(c) avoid impacts on affected communities.
130/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Disclosure Requirement E3-2 – Actions and resources related to water and marine resources policies
AR 19. When disclosing information required under paragraph 15, the undertaking shall consider the actions, or action
plans, contributing to address the material impacts, risks and opportunities identified. Useful guidance is provided
by the Alliance for Water Stewardship (AWS).
AR 20. Considering that water and marine resources are shared resources which may require collective actions, or action
plans, involving other stakeholders, the undertaking may provide information on those specific collective actions,
including information on other parties (competitors, suppliers, retailers, customers, other business partners, local
communities and authorities, government agencies…) and specific information on the project, its specific
contribution, its sponsors and other participants.
AR 21. When providing information on capital expenditures, the undertaking may consider expenditures related, for
example, to stormwater drain rehabilitation, pipelines, or machinery used to manufacture new low water-use
products.
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement E3-3 – Targets related to water and marine resources
AR 22. If the undertaking refers to ecological thresholds when setting targets, it may refer to the guidance provided by the
Science-Based Targets Initiative for Nature (SBTN) in its interim guidance (Initial Guidance for Business, September
2020). It may also refer to any other guidance with a scientifically acknowledged methodology that enables the
setting of science-based targets by identifying ecological thresholds and, if applicable, organisation-specific
allocations. Ecological thresholds can be local, national and/or global.
AR 23. The undertaking may provide targets relating to:
(a) the reduction of water withdrawals; and
(b) the reduction of water discharges.
AR 24. If the undertaking provides targets on withdrawals, it may include water withdrawal from polluted soils and
aquifers, and water withdrawn and treated for remediation purposes.
AR 25. If the undertaking provides targets on discharges, it may include water discharges to groundwater such as
reinjection to aquifers, or water returning to a groundwater source via a soakaway or a swale.
AR 26. The targets may cover its own operations and/or its upstream and downstream value chain.
AR 27. The undertaking may specify whether the target addresses shortcomings related to the Substantial Contribution
criteria for Water and Marine Resources as defined in the Commission delegated acts adopted pursuant to
Article 12(2) of Regulation (EU) 2020/852. Where the Do No Significant Harm (DNSH) criteria for Water and
Marine Resources as defined in delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 10(3), Article 11(3), Article 13(2),
Article 14(2), and Article 15(2) of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 are not met, the undertaking may specify whether
the target addresses shortcomings related those DNSH criteria.
Disclosure Requirement E3-4 – Water consumption
AR 28. The undertaking may operate in various areas at water risk. When disclosing information under paragraph 28 (b),
the undertaking shall include such information only for those areas that have been identified as material in
accordance with ESRS2 IRO-1 and ESRS2 SBM-3.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 131/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 29. When disclosing contextual information on water consumption performance required by paragraph 26, the
undertaking shall explain the calculation methodologies and more specifically the share of the measure obtained
from direct measurement, from sampling and extrapolation, or from best estimates.
AR 30. The undertaking may provide information on other breakdowns (i.e., per sector or segments).
AR 31. When disclosing information required by paragraph 29 the undertaking may provide additional intensity ratios
based on other denominators.
AR 32. The undertaking may also provide information on its water withdrawals and water discharges.
Disclosure Requirement E3-5 – Anticipated financial effects from material water and marine resources-related risks and
opportunities
AR 33. The undertaking may include an assessment of its related products and services at risk over the short-, medium-
and long-term, explaining how these are defined, how financial amounts are estimated, and which critical
assumptions are made.
AR 34. The quantification of the anticipated financial effects in monetary terms under paragraph 39(a) may be a single
amount or a range.
132/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
ESRS E4
BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEMS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Objective
Interaction with other ESRS
Disclosure Requirements
– ESRS 2 General disclosures
Strategy
— Disclosure Requirement E4-1 – Transition plan and consideration of biodiversity and ecosystems in strategy
and business model
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 – Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their
interaction with strategy and business model
Impact, risk and opportunity management
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 Description of processes to identify and assess material
biodiversity and ecosystem-related impacts, risks and opportunities
— Disclosure Requirement E4-2 – Policies related to biodiversity and ecosystems
— Disclosure Requirement E4-3 – Actions and resources related to biodiversity and ecosystems
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement E4-4 – Targets related to biodiversity and ecosystems
— Disclosure Requirement E4-5 – Impact metrics related to biodiversity and ecosystems change
— Disclosure Requirement E4-6 – Anticipated financial effects from biodiversity and ecosystem-related risks
and opportunities
Appendix A: Application Requirements
– ESRS 2 General disclosures
Impact, risk and opportunity management
— Disclosure Requirement E4-1 – Transition plan and consideration of biodiversity and ecosystems in strategy
and business model
— Disclosure requirements related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify and assess
material biodiversity and ecosystem-related impacts, risks and opportunities
— Disclosure Requirement E4-2 – Policies related to biodiversity and ecosystems
— Disclosure Requirement E4-3 – Actions and resources related to biodiversity and ecosystems
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement E4-4 – Targets related to biodiversity and ecosystems
— Disclosure Requirement E4-5 – Impact metrics related to biodiversity and ecosystems change
— Disclosure Requirement E4-6 – Anticipated financial effects from biodiversity and ecosystem-related risks
and opportunities
Objective
1. The objective of this Standard is to specify Disclosure Requirements which will enable users of the sustainability
statement to understand:
(a) how the undertaking affects biodiversity and ecosystems, in terms of material positive and negative, actual and
potential impacts, including the extent to which it contributes to the drivers of biodiversity and ecosystem loss
and degradation;
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 133/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) any actions taken, and the result of such actions, to prevent or mitigate material negative actual or potential
impacts and to protect and restore biodiversity and ecosystems, and to address risks and opportunities; and
(c) the plans and capacity of the undertaking to adapt its strategy and business model in line with:
i. respecting planetary boundaries related to biosphere integrity and land-system change;
ii. the vision of the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework and its relevant goals and targets;
iii. relevant aspects of the EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030(70);
iv. Directive 2009/147/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and Council Directive 92/43/EEC (EU
Birds and Habitats Directives)(71); and
v. Directive 2008/56/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (Marine Strategy Framework
Directive(72);
(d) the nature, type and extent of the undertaking’s material risks, dependencies and opportunities related to
biodiversity and ecosystems, and how the undertaking manages them; and
(e) the financial effects on the undertaking over the short-, medium- and long-term of material risks and
opportunities arising from the undertaking’s impacts and dependencies on biodiversity and ecosystems.
2. This Standard sets out Disclosure Requirements related to the undertaking’s relationship to terrestrial, freshwater and
marine habitats, ecosystems and populations of related fauna and flora species, including diversity within species,
between species and of ecosystems and their interrelation with indigenous peoples and other affected communities.
3. The terms “biodiversity” and “biological diversity” refer to the variability among living organisms from all sources
including, inter alia, terrestrial, freshwater, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of
which they are part.
Interaction with other ESRS
4. ‘Biodiversity and ecosystems’ are closely connected to other environmental matters. The main direct drivers of
biodiversity and ecosystems change are climate change, pollution, land-use change, freshwater-use change and sea-
use change, direct exploitation of organisms and invasive alien species. These drivers are covered in this standard,
except for climate change (covered by ESRS E1) and pollution (covered by ESRS E2).
5. To obtain a comprehensive understanding of material impacts and dependencies on biodiversity and ecosystems, the
Disclosure Requirements of other environmental ESRS should be read and interpreted in conjunction with the
specific disclosure requirements of this Standard. The relevant disclosure requirements covered in other
environmental ESRS are:
(a) ESRS E1 Climate change, which addresses in particular GHG emissions and energy resources (energy
consumption);
(b) ESRS E2 Pollution, which addresses pollution to air, water and soil;
(c) ESRS E3 Water and marine resources which addresses in particular water resources (water consumption) and
marine resources;
(70) EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030- Bringing nature back into our lives, COM/2020/380 final.
(71) Directive 2009/147/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 November 2009 on the conservation of wild birds
(OJ L 20, 26.1.2010, p. 7) and Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild
fauna and flora (OJ L 206, 22.7.1992, p. 7).
(72) Directive 2008/56/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 June 2008 establishing a framework for community
action in the field of marine environmental policy (Marine Strategy Framework Directive) (OJ L 164, 25.6.2008, p. 19).
134/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(d) ESRS E5 Resource use and circular economy addresses in particular the transition away from extraction of non-
renewable resources and the implementation of practices that prevent waste generation, including pollution
generated by waste.
6. The undertaking’s impacts on biodiversity and ecosystems affect people and communities. When reporting on
material negative impacts on affected communities from biodiversity and ecosystem change under ESRS E4, the
undertaking shall consider the requirements of ESRS S3 Affected communities.
7. This Standard should be read in conjunction with ESRS 1 General requirements and ESRS 2 General disclosures.
Disclosure Requirements
ESRS 2 General disclosures
8. The requirements of this section shall be read in conjunction with the disclosures required by ESRS 2 Chapter 2
Governance, Chapter 3 Strategy and Chapter 4 Impact, risk and opportunity management.
9. The resulting disclosures shall be presented alongside the disclosures required by ESRS 2, except for ESRS 2 SBM-3,
for which the undertaking has an option to present the disclosures alongside the topical disclosures.
10. In addition to the requirements in ESRS 2, this Standard also includes the topic specific Disclosure Requirement E4-1
Transition plan and consideration of biodiversity and ecosystems in strategy and business model.
Strategy
Disclosure Requirement E4-1 – Transition plan and consideration of biodiversity and ecosystems in strategy and
business model
11. The undertaking shall disclose how its biodiversity and ecosystem impacts, dependencies, risks and opportunities
originate from and trigger adaptation of its strategy and business model.
12. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the resilience of the undertaking’s
strategy and business model in relation to biodiversity and ecosystems, and of the compatibility of the undertaking’s
strategy and business model with regard to relevant local, national and global public policy targets related to
biodiversity and ecosystems.
13. The undertaking shall describe the resilience of its strategy and business model in relation to biodiversity and
ecosystems. The description shall include:
(a) an assessment of the resilience of the current business model and strategy to biodiversity and ecosystems-related
physical, transition and systemic risks;
(b) the scope of the resilience analysis in relation to the undertaking’s own operations and its upstream and
downstream value chain and in relation to the risks considered in that analysis;
(c) the key assumptions made;
(d) the time horizons used;
(e) the results of the resilience analysis; and
(f) the involvement of stakeholders, including, where appropriate, holders of indigenous and local knowledge.
14. If information specified in this disclosure requirement is disclosed by the undertaking as part of the information
required under ESRS 2 SBM-3, the undertaking may refer to the information it has disclosed under ESRS 2 SBM-3.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 135/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
15. The undertaking may disclose its transition plan to improve and, ultimately, achieve alignment of its business model
and strategy with the vision of the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework and its relevant goals and
targets, the EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030, and with respecting planetary boundaries related to biosphere
integrity and land-system change.
Disclosure Requirement SBM 3 – Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and
business model
16. The undertaking shall disclose:
(a) a list of material sites in its own operations, including sites under its operational control, based on the results of
paragraph 17(a). The undertaking shall disclose these locations by:
i. specifying the activities negatively affecting biodiversity sensitive areas(73);
ii. providing a breakdown of sites according to the impacts and dependencies identified, and to the ecological
status of the areas (with reference to the specific ecosystem baseline level) where they are located; and
iii. specifying the biodiversity-sensitive areas impacted, for users to be able to determine the location and the
responsible competent authority with regards to the activities specified in paragraph 16(a) i.
(b) whether it has identified material negative impacts with regards to land degradation, desertification or soil
sealing(74); and
(c) whether it has operations that affect threatened species(75).
Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 Description of processes to identify and assess material biodiversity
and ecosystem-related impacts, risks, dependencies and opportunities
17. The undertaking shall describe its process to identify material impacts, risks, dependencies and opportunities. The
description of the process shall include whether and how the undertaking:
(a) identified and assessed actual and potential impacts on biodiversity and ecosystems at own site locations and in
the upstream and downstream value chain, including assessment criteria applied;
(b) identified and assessed dependencies on biodiversity and ecosystems and their services at own site locations and
in the upstream and downstream value chain, including assessment criteria applied, and, if this assessment
includes ecosystem services that are disrupted or likely to be;
(c) identified and assessed transition and physical risks and opportunities related to biodiversity and ecosystems,
including assessment criteria applied based on its impacts and dependencies;
(d) considered systemic risks;
(73) This information supports the information needs of financial markets participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #7 in Table 1 Annex 1 of the related
Delegated Regulation with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments ( “Activities negatively affecting biodiversity-sensitive
areas”).
(74) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impact as set out by indicator #10 in Table 2 of Annex 1 of the
related Delegated Regulation with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Land degradation, desertification, soil
sealing”).
(75) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impact as set out by indicator #14 in Table 2 of Annex 1 of the
related Delegated Regulation with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Natural species and protected areas”).
136/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(e) conducted consultations with affected communities on sustainability assessments of shared biological resources
and ecosystems and, in particular:
i. when a site, a raw material production or sourcing is likely to negatively impact biodiversity and ecosystems,
the identification of the specific sites, raw materials production or sourcing with negative or potentially
negative impacts on affected communities;
ii. when affected communities are likely to be impacted, the undertaking, shall disclose how these communities
were involved in the materiality assessment; and
iii. with respect to impacts on ecosystem services of relevance to affected communities in its own operations, the
undertaking shall indicate how negative impacts may be avoided. If these impacts are unavoidable, the
undertaking may indicate its plans to minimise them and implement mitigation measures that aim to
maintain the value and functionality of priority services.
18. The undertaking may disclose whether and how it has used biodiversity and ecosystems scenario analysis to inform
the identification and assessment of material risks and opportunities over short-, medium- and long-term time
horizons. If the undertaking has used such scenario analysis, it may disclose the following information:
(a) why the considered scenarios were selected;
(b) how the considered scenarios are updated according to evolving conditions and emerging trends; and
(c) whether the scenarios are informed by expectations published by authoritative intergovernmental bodies, such as
the Convention for Biological Diversity and, where relevant, by scientific consensus, such as that expressed by the
Intergovernmental Science-policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES).
19. The undertaking shall specifically disclose:
(a) whether or not it has sites located in or near biodiversity-sensitive areas and whether activities related to these
sites negatively affect these areas by leading to the deterioration of natural habitats and the habitats of species
and to the disturbance of the species for which a protected area has been designated; and
(b) whether it has been concluded that it is necessary to implement biodiversity mitigation measures, such as those
identified in: Directive 2009/147/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the conservation of wild
birds; Council Directive 92/43/EEC on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora; an
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) as defined in Article 1(2), point (g), of Directive 2011/92/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council(76) on the assessment of the effects of certain public and private
projects on the environment; and for activities located in third countries, in accordance with equivalent national
provisions or international standards, such as the International Finance Corporation (IFC) Performance Standard
6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources.
Disclosure Requirement E4-2 – Policies related to biodiversity and ecosystems
20. The undertaking shall describe its adopted policies to manage its material impacts, risks, dependencies, and
opportunities related to biodiversity and ecosystems.
21. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the extent to which the undertaking
has policies that address the identification, assessment, management and/or remediation of its material biodiversity
and ecosystem- related impacts, dependencies, risks and opportunities.
22. The disclosure required by paragraph 20 shall contain the information on the policies the undertaking has in place to
manage its material impacts, risks, dependencies and opportunities related to biodiversity and ecosystems in
accordance with ESRS 2 MDR-P Policies adopted to manage material sustainability matters).
(76) Directive 2011/92/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2011 on the assessment of the effects of certain
public and private projects on the environment (OJ L 26, 28.1.2012, p. 1).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 137/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
23. In addition to the provisions of ESRS 2 MDR-P the undertaking shall describe whether and how its biodiversity and
ecosystems-related policies:
(a) relate to the matters specified in ESRS E4 AR 4;
(b) relate to its material biodiversity and ecosystems-related impacts;
(c) relate to material dependencies and material physical and transition risks and opportunities;
(d) support traceability of products, components and raw materials with material actual or potential impacts on
biodiversity and ecosystems along the value chain;
(e) address production, sourcing or consumption from ecosystems that are managed to maintain or enhance
conditions for biodiversity, as demonstrated by regular monitoring and reporting of biodiversity status and gains
or losses; and
(f) address social consequences of biodiversity and ecosystems-related impacts.
24. The undertaking shall specifically disclose whether it has adopted:
(a) biodiversity and ecosystem protection policy covering operational sites owned, leased, or managed in or near a
biodiversity sensitive area;
(b) sustainable land / agriculture practices or policies(77);
(c) sustainable oceans / seas practices or policies(78); and
(d) policies to address deforestation(79).
Disclosure Requirement E4-3 – Actions and resources related to biodiversity and ecosystems
25. The undertaking shall disclose its biodiversity and ecosystems-related actions and the resources allocated to their
implementation.
26. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the key actions taken and planned that
significantly contribute to the achievement of biodiversity and ecosystems-related policy objectives and targets.
27. The description of key actions and resources shall follow the mandatory content defined in ESRS 2 MDR-A Actions
and resources in relation to material sustainability matters.
28. In addition, the undertaking :
(a) may disclose how it has applied the mitigation hierarchy with regard to its actions (avoidance, minimisation,
restoration/rehabilitation, and compensation or offsets);
(b) shall disclose whether it used biodiversity offsets in its action plans. If the actions contain biodiversity offsets, the
undertaking shall include the following information:
i. the aim of the offset and key performance indicators used;
ii. the financing effects (direct and indirect costs) of biodiversity offsets in monetary terms; and;
iii. a description of offsets including area, type, the quality criteria applied and the standards that the biodiversity
offsets comply with;
(77) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impact as set out by indicator #11 in Table II of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Investments in
companies without sustainable land/agriculture practices”).
(78) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impact as set out by indicator #12 in Table II of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Investments in
companies without sustainable oceans/seas practices”).
(79) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impact as set out by indicator #15 in Table II of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Deforestation”).
138/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(c) shall describe whether and how it has incorporated local and indigenous knowledge and nature- based solutions
into biodiversity and ecosystems-related actions.
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement E4-4 – Targets related to biodiversity and ecosystems
29. The undertaking shall disclose the biodiversity and ecosystem-related targets it has set.
30. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to allow an understanding of the targets the undertaking has adopted
to support its biodiversity and ecosystems policies and address its material related impacts, dependencies, risks and
opportunities.
31. The description of the targets shall follow the mandatory content defined in ESRS 2 MDR-T Tracking effectiveness of
policies and actions through targets.
32. The disclosure required by paragraph 29 shall include the following information:
(a) whether ecological thresholds and allocations of impacts to the undertaking were applied when setting targets. If
so, the undertaking shall specify:
i. the ecological thresholds identified and the methodology used to identify such thresholds;
ii. whether or not the thresholds are entity-specific and if so, how they were determined; and
iii. how responsibility for respecting identified ecological thresholds is allocated in the undertaking;
(b) whether the targets are informed by, and/or aligned with the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework,
relevant aspects of the EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030 and other biodiversity and ecosystem-related national
policies and legislation;
(c) how the targets relate to the biodiversity and ecosystem impacts, dependencies, risks and opportunities identified
by the undertaking in relation to its own operations and its upstream and downstream value chain;
(d) the geographical scope of the targets, if relevant;
(e) whether or not the undertaking used biodiversity offsets in setting its targets; and
(f) to which of the layers of the mitigation hierarchy the target can be allocated (i.e., avoidance, minimisation,
restoration and rehabilitation, compensation or offsets).
Disclosure Requirement E4-5 – Impact metrics related to biodiversity and ecosystems change
33. The undertaking shall report metrics related to its material impacts on biodiversity and ecosystems.
34. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the performance of the undertaking
against impacts identified as material in the materiality assessment on biodiversity and ecosystems change.
35. If the undertaking identified sites located in or near biodiversity-sensitive areas that it is negatively affecting (see
paragraph 19(a)), the undertaking shall disclose the number and area (in hectares) of sites owned, leased or managed
in or near these protected areas or key biodiversity areas.
36. If the undertaking has identified material impacts with regards to land-use change, or impacts on the extent and
condition of ecosystems, it may also disclose their land-use based on a Life Cycle Assessment.
37. For datapoints specified in paragraphs 38 to 41, the undertaking shall consider its own operations.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 139/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
38. If the undertaking has concluded that it directly contributes to the impact drivers of land-use change, freshwater-use
change and/or sea-use change, it shall report relevant metrics. The undertaking may disclose metrics that measure:
(a) the conversion over time (e.g. 1 or 5 years) of land cover (e.g. deforestation or mining);
(b) changes over time (e.g. 1 or 5 years) in the management of the ecosystem (e.g., through the intensification of
agricultural management, or the application of better management practices or forestry harvesting);
(c) changes in the spatial configuration of the landscape (e.g. fragmentation of habitats, changes in ecosystem
connectivity);
(d) changes in ecosystem structural connectivity (e.g. habitat permeability based on physical features and
arrangements of habitat patches); and
(e) the functional connectivity (e.g. how well genes or individuals move through land, freshwater and seascape).
39. If the undertaking concluded that it directly contributes to the accidental or voluntary introduction of invasive alien
species, the undertaking may disclose the metrics it uses to manage pathways of introduction and spread of invasive
alien species and the risks posed by invasive alien species.
40. If the undertaking identified material impacts related to the state of species, the undertaking may report metrics it
considers relevant. The undertaking may:
(a) refer to relevant disclosure requirements in ESRS E1, ESRS E2, ESRS E3, and ESRS E5;
(b) consider population size, range within specific ecosystems as well as extinction risk. These aspects provide
insight on the health of a single species’ population and its relative resilience to human induced and naturally
occurring change;
(c) disclose metrics that measure changes in the number of individuals of a species within a specific area;
(d) disclose metrics on species at extinction risk(80)that measure:
i. the threat status of species and how activities/pressures may affect the threat status; or
ii. changes in the relevant habitat for a threatened species as a proxy for the undertaking’s impact on the local
population’s extinction risk.
41. If the undertaking identified material impacts related to ecosystems, it may disclose:
(a) with regard to ecosystems extent, metrics that measure area coverage of a particular ecosystem without
necessarily considering the quality of the area being assessed, such as habitat cover. For example, forest cover is
a measure of the extent of a particular ecosystem type, without factoring in the condition of the ecosystem (e.g.,
provides the area without describing the species diversity within the forest).
(b) with regard to ecosystems condition:
i. metrics that measure the quality of ecosystems relative to a pre-determined reference state;
ii. metrics that measure multiple species within an ecosystem rather than the number of individuals within a
single species within an ecosystem (for example: scientifically established species richness and abundance
indicators that measure the development of (native) species composition within an ecosystem against the
reference state at the beginning of the first reporting period as well as the targeted state outlined in the
Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework, or an aggregation of species’ conservation status if
relevant); or
iii. metrics that reflect structural components of condition such as habitat connectivity (i.e., how linked habitats
are to each other).
(80) As indicated in the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species and the European Red List published by the European Commission.
140/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Disclosure Requirement E4-6 – Anticipated financial effects from material biodiversity and ecosystem-related risks and
opportunities
42. The undertaking shall disclose its anticipated financial effects of material biodiversity- and ecosystem-related risks
and opportunities.
43. The information required by paragraph 42 is in addition to the information on current financial effects on the entity’s
financial position, financial performance and cash flows for the reporting period required under ESRS 2 SBM-3 para
48 (d).
44. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of:
(a) anticipated financial effects due to material risks arising from biodiversity- and ecosystem-related impacts and
dependencies and how these risks have (or could reasonably be expected to have) a material influence on the
undertaking’s financial position, financial performance and cash flows over the short-, medium- and long-term;
and
(b) anticipated financial effects due to material opportunities related to biodiversity- and ecosystem.
45. The disclosure shall include:
(a) a quantification of the anticipated financial effects in monetary terms before considering biodiversity and
ecosystems-related actions or where not possible without undue cost or effort, qualitative information. For
financial effects arising from material opportunities, a quantification is not required if it would result in
disclosure that does not meet the qualitative characteristics of information (see ESRS 1 Appendix B Qualitative
characteristics of information). The quantification of the anticipated financial effects in monetary terms may be a
single amount or a range;
(b) a description of the effects considered, the impacts and dependencies to which they relate and the time horizons
in which they are likely to materialise; and
(c) the critical assumptions used to quantify the anticipated financial effects as well as the sources and the level of
uncertainty of those assumptions.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 141/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix A
Application Requirements
This appendix is an integral part of the ESRS E4. It supports the application of the disclosure requirements set out in this
standard and has the same authority as the other parts of the standard.
ESRS 2 GENERAL DISCLOSURES
Strategy
Disclosure Requirement E4-1 – Transition plan and consideration of biodiversity and ecosystems in strategy and
business model
AR 1. If disclosing a transition plan, the undertaking may:
(a) explain how it will adjust its strategy and business model to improve and, ultimately, achieve alignment with
relevant local, national and global public policy goals and targets related to biodiversity and ecosystems
including the vision of the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework and its relevant goals and
targets, the EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030, and Directive 2009/147/EC Council Directive 92/43/EEC (the
EU Birds and Habitats Directives) and, as appropriate, planetary boundaries related to biosphere integrity and
land-system change;
(b) include information about its own operations and also explain how it is responding to material impacts in its
upstream and downstream value chain identified in its materiality assessment in accordance with ESRS 2
IRO-1 Description of the processes to identify and assess material impacts, risks and opportunities;
(c) explain how its strategy interacts with its transition plan;
(d) explain how it contributes to addressing biodiversity and ecosystem impact drivers and its possible mitigation
actions following the mitigation hierarchy and the main path-dependencies and locked-in assets and resources
(e.g., plants, raw materials) that are associated with biodiversity and ecosystems change;
(e) explain and quantify its investments and funding supporting the implementation of its transition plan, with a
reference to the key performance indicators of taxonomy-aligned CapEx, and where relevant the CapEx plans,
that the undertaking discloses in accordance with Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2178;
(f) if it has economic activities that are covered by delegated regulations on biodiversity under the Taxonomy
Regulation, explain any objective or plans (CapEX, CapEx plans) that it has for aligning its economic activities
(revenues, CapEx) with the criteria established in those delegated regulations;
(g) explain how biodiversity offsets are used as part of the transition plan, and if so, where the offsets are planned
to be used, the extent of use in relation to the overall transition plan, and whether the mitigation hierarchy was
considered;
(h) explain how the process of implementing and updating the transition plan is managed;
(i) explain how it measures progress, namely indicate the metrics and methodologies it uses for that purpose;
(j) indicate whether the administrative, management and supervisory bodies have approved the transition plan;
and
(k) indicate current challenges and limitations to draft a plan in relation to areas of significant impact and how the
company is addressing those challenges.
AR 2. If disclosing a transition plan, the undertaking may, for example, refer to the following targets from the EU
Biodiversity Strategy for 2030:
(a) The decline of pollinators is reversed.
(b) The risk and use of chemical pesticides is reduced by 50%, and the use of more hazardous pesticides is reduced
by 50%.
142/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(c) At least 25% of agricultural land is under organic farming management, and the uptake of agro-ecological
practices is significantly increased.
(d) Three billion additional trees are planted in the EU, in full respect of ecological principles.
(e) Significant progress in the remediation of contaminated soil sites.
(f) At least 25 000km of free-flowing rivers are restored.
(g) The losses of nutrients from fertilisers are reduced by 50%, resulting in the reduction of the use of fertilisers by
at least 20%.
(h) The negative impacts on sensitive species and habitats, including on the seabed through fishing and extraction
activities, are substantially reduced to achieve good environmental status.
AR 3. If disclosing a transition plan, the undertaking may also refer to the Sustainable Development Goals, in particular:
(a) SDG 2 - End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture;
(b) SDG 6 - Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all;
(c) SDG 14 - Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development;
and
(d) SDG 15 - Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests,
combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss.
Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure requirements related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify and assess material
biodiversity and ecosystem-related impacts, risks and opportunities
AR 4. The materiality assessment under ESRS E4 includes the undertaking’s:
(a) contribution to direct impact drivers on biodiversity loss(81):
i. climate change;
ii. land-use change (e.g., land artificialisation), freshwater-use change and sea-use change;
iii. direct exploitation;
iv. invasive alien species;
v. pollution; and
vi. others.
(b) impacts on the state of species (i.e., species population size, species global extinction risk);
(c) impacts on the extent and condition of ecosystems including through land degradation, desertification and
soil sealing); and
(d) impacts and dependencies on ecosystem services.
AR 5. When assessing the materiality of impacts, dependencies, risks and opportunities the undertaking shall consider
the provisions in ESRS 2 IRO-1 and ESRS 1 Chapter 3 Double materiality as the basis for sustainability disclosures and
describe its considerations.
(81) The direct driver climate change is to be reported under ESRS E1 Climate Change and pollution under ESRS E2 Pollution.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 143/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 6. The undertaking shall assess the materiality of biodiversity and ecosystems in its own operations and its upstream
and downstream value chain, and may conduct its materiality assessment in line with the first three phases of the
LEAP approach: Locate (paragraph AR 7), Evaluate (paragraph AR 8) and Assess (paragraph AR 9).
AR 7. Phase 1 relates to the localisation of relevant sites regarding its interface with biodiversity and ecosystems. To
identify these relevant sites the undertaking may:
(a) develop a list of locations of direct assets and operations and related upstream and downstream value chain
that are relevant to the undertakings business activities. Furthermore, the undertaking may provide
information about sites for which future operations have been formally announced;
(b) list the biomes and ecosystems it is interfacing with based on the list of locations identified under paragraph
AR 7(a);
(c) identify the current integrity and importance of biodiversity and ecosystem at each location taking into
consideration the information provided in paragraphs 16 and 17;
(d) develop a list of locations where the undertaking is interfacing with locations in or near biodiversity-sensitive
areas taking into consideration the information provided in paragraphs 16 and 17; and
(e) identify which sectors, business units, value chains or asset classes are interfacing with biodiversity and
ecosystems in these material sites. Instead of identifying these interfaces per site, the undertaking may choose
to identify them per raw material procured or sold by weight in tons, if such practice offers greater
transparency.
AR 8. In Phase 2, to evaluate its actual or potential impacts and dependencies on biodiversity and ecosystems for relevant
sites, the undertaking may:
(a) identify business processes and activities that interface with biodiversity and ecosystems;
(b) identify actual and potential impacts and dependencies;
(c) indicate the size, scale, frequency of occurrence and timeframe of the impacts on biodiversity and ecosystems
taking into consideration the disclosures under paragraphs 16 and 17. Furthermore, the undertaking may
disclose:
i. the percentage of its suppliers’ facilities which are located in risk prone areas (with threatened species on
the IUCN Red List of Species, the Birds and Habitats Directive or nationally list of threatened species, or in
officially recognised Protected Areas, the Natura 2000 network of protected areas and Key Biodiversity
Areas);
ii. the percentage of its procurement spend from suppliers with facilities which are located in risk prone areas
(with threatened species on the IUCN Red List of Species, the Birds and Habitats Directive or nationally list
of threatened species, or in officially recognised Protected Areas, the Natura 2000 network of protected
areas and Key Biodiversity Areas); and
(d) indicate the size and scale of the dependencies on biodiversity and ecosystems, including on raw materials,
natural resources and ecosystem services. The undertaking may rely on the international classifications such
as the Common International Classification of Ecosystem Services (CICES).
AR 9. In Phase 3, to assesses its material risks and opportunities based on the results of Phases 1 and 2, the undertaking
may consider the following categories:
(a) physical risks:
i. acute risks (e.g., natural disasters exacerbated by loss of coastal protection from ecosystems, leading to
costs of storm damage to coastal infrastructure, disease or pests affecting the species or variety of crop the
undertaking relies on, especially in the case of no or low genetic diversity, species loss and ecosystem
degradation); and
144/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
ii. chronic risks (e.g., loss of crop yield due to decline in pollination services, increasing scarcity or variable
production of key natural inputs, ecosystem degradation due to operations leading to, for example, coastal
erosion and forest fragmentation, ocean acidification, land loss to desertification and soil degradation and
consequent loss of soil fertility, species loss).
(b) transition risks, including:
i. policy and legal: e.g. introduction of regulation or policy (e.g. changes such as increased land protection);
exposure to sanctions and litigation (e.g. spills of polluting effluents that damage human and ecosystem
health; or violation of biodiversity-related rights, permits or allocations; or negligence towards or killing
of threatened species); enhanced reporting obligations on biodiversity, ecosystems and related services;
ii. technology: e.g. substitution of products or services by products or services with a lower impact on
biodiversity or dependence on ecosystem services, lack of access to data or access to poor quality data
that hamper biodiversity-related assessments, transition to more efficient and cleaner technologies (i.e.
with lower impacts on biodiversity), new monitoring technologies (e.g. satellite), requirements to use
certain technologies (e.g. climate resistant crops, mechanical pollinators, water purification, flood
protection);
iii. market: e.g., shifting supply, demand and financing, volatility or increased costs of raw materials (e.g.,
biodiversity-intense inputs for which price has risen due to ecosystem degradation);
iv. reputation: e.g., changing societal, customer or community perceptions as a result of an organisation’s role
in loss of biodiversity, violation of nature-related rights through operations, negative media coverage due
to impacts on critical species and/or ecosystems, biodiversity-related social conflicts over endangered
species, protected areas, resources or pollution.
(c) systemic risks, including:
i. ecosystem collapse risks that a critical natural system no longer functions, e.g., tipping points are reached
and the collapse of ecosystems resulting in wholesale geographic or sector losses (summing physical risks);
ii. aggregated risk linked to fundamental impacts of biodiversity loss to levels of transition and physical risk
across one or more sectors in a portfolio (corporate or financial); and
iii. contagion risks that financial difficulties of certain corporations or financial institutions linked to failure to
account for exposure to biodiversity-related risks spill over to the economic system as a whole.
(d) opportunities, including for example:
i. business performance categories: resource efficiency; products and services; markets; capital flow and
financing; reputational capital; and
ii. sustainability performance categories: ecosystem protection, restoration and regeneration; sustainability
use of natural resources.
Presentation of information:
AR 10. The undertaking may consider the tables below to facilitate its materiality assessment of material sites identified
under paragraph AR 7:
Ecosystem service… Actual or potential dependencies
... Change of functionality Financial loss
… Limited, moderate or significant Limited, moderate or significant
… … …
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 145/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Threatened species,
Site location protected areas, key Actual or potential impacts
biodiversity areas
… Frequency of Severity of impact Potential for
… Speed of impact
occurrence mitigation
… <1 year or High, medium or High, medium or
High, medium or
… 1-3 years low low
low
or >3 years
… … … … … …
With regard to AR 7(e), the undertaking may consider using the table below:
Where are the raw materials produced or Absolute weight of raw materials (and
sourced from? percentage of the raw material weight)
In areas with species listed on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, the Birds
and Habitats …
Directive or on national lists of threated species
In officially recognised protected Areas …
In other Key Biodiversity Areas …
Disclosure Requirement E4-2 – Policies related to biodiversity and ecosystems
AR 11. The policies described under this Disclosure Requirement may be integrated in broader environmental or
sustainability policies covering different subtopics.
AR 12. The undertaking may also provide information on how the policy refers to the production, sourcing or
consumption of raw materials, and in particular how it:
(a) limits procurement from suppliers that cannot demonstrate that they are not contributing to significant
damage to protected areas or key biodiversity areas (e.g., through certification);
(b) refers to recognised standards or third-party certifications overseen by regulators; and
(c) addresses raw materials originating from ecosystems that have been managed to maintain or enhance
conditions for biodiversity, as demonstrated by regular monitoring and reporting of biodiversity status and
gains or losses.
AR 13. The undertaking may disclose connections and alignment with other global goals and agreements such as the
SDGs 2, 6, 14 and 15 or any other well established global convention related to biodiversity and ecosystems.
AR 14. When disclosing policies related to social consequences of biodiversity and ecosystems related dependencies and
impacts under 23 (f), the undertaking may notably refer to the Nagoya Protocol and the Convention for Biological
Diversity (CBD).
AR 15. When disclosing information about whether and how its policies address the social consequences of biodiversity
and ecosystems-related impacts under paragraph 23(f), the undertaking may provide information in relation to:
(a) the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the utilisation of genetic resources; and
(b) the free, prior and informed consent for access to genetic resources.
146/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 16. The undertaking may also explain how its policy enables it to:
(a) avoid negative impacts on biodiversity and ecosystems in its own operations and related upstream and
downstream value chain;
(b) reduce and minimise its negative impacts on biodiversity and ecosystems in its operations and throughout the
upstream and downstream value chain that cannot be avoided;
(c) restore and rehabilitate degraded ecosystems or restore cleared ecosystems following exposure to impacts that
cannot be completely avoided and/or minimised; and
(d) mitigate its contribution to material biodiversity loss drivers.
AR 17. When disclosing its policies, if referring to third-party standards of conduct, the undertaking may disclose whether
the standard used:
(a) is objective and achievable based on a scientific approach to identifying issues, and realistic in assessing how
these issues can be addressed on the ground under a variety of practical circumstances;
(b) is developed or maintained through a process of ongoing consultation with stakeholders with balanced input
from all relevant stakeholder groups, including producers, traders, processors, financiers, local people and
communities, indigenous peoples, and civil society organisations representing consumer, environmental and
social interests, with no group holding undue authority or veto power over the content;
(c) encourages a step-wise approach and continuous improvement, both in the standard and its application of
better management practices, and requires the establishment of meaningful targets and specific milestones to
indicate progress against principles and criteria over time;
(d) is verifiable through independent certifying or verifying bodies, which have defined and rigorous assessment
procedures that avoid conflicts of interest, and are compliant with ISO guidance on accreditation and
verification procedures or Article 5(2) of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008; and
(e) conforms to the ISEAL Code of Good Practice.
Disclosure Requirement E4-3 – Actions and resources related to biodiversity and ecosystems
AR 18. The undertaking may relate significant monetary amounts of CapEx and OpEx required to implement the actions
taken or planned to:
(a) the relevant line items or notes in the financial statements;
(b) the key performance indicators required under article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 and under Commission
Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2178; and
(c) if applicable, the CapEx plan required by Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2178.
AR 19. The undertaking may disclose whether it considers an “avoidance” action plan, which prevents damaging actions
before they take place. Avoidance often involves a decision to deviate from the business-as-usual project
development path. An example of avoidance is altering the biodiversity and ecosystem footprint of a project to
avoid destruction of natural habitat on the site and/or establishing set-asides where priority biodiversity values
are present and will be conserved. At a minimum, avoidance should be considered where there are biodiversity
and ecosystem-related values that are in one of the following categories: particularly vulnerable and irreplaceable,
of particular concern to stakeholders, or where a cautious approach is warranted due to uncertainty about impact
assessment or about the efficacy of management measures. The three main types of avoidance are defined below:
(a) avoidance through site selection (Locate the entire project away from areas recognised for important
biodiversity values);
(b) avoidance through project design (Configure infrastructure to preserve areas at the project site with important
biodiversity values); and
(c) avoidance through scheduling (Time project activities to account for patterns of species behaviour (e.g.,
breeding, migration) or ecosystem functions (e.g., river dynamics).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 147/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 20. With regard to key actions, the undertaking may disclose:
(a) a list of key stakeholders involved (e.g., competitors, suppliers, retailers, other business partners, affected
communities and authorities, government agencies) and how they are involved, mentioning key stakeholders
negatively or positively impacted by actions and how they are impacted, including impacts or benefits created
for affected communities, smallholders, indigenous peoples or other persons in vulnerable situations;
(b) where applicable, an explanation of the need for appropriate consultations and the need to respect the
decisions of affected communities;
(c) a brief assessment of whether the key actions may induce significant negative sustainability impacts;
(d) an explanation of whether the key action is intended to be a one-time initiative or systematic practice;
(e) an explanation of whether the key action plan is carried out only by the undertaking, using the undertaking’s
resources, or whether it is part of a wider initiative to which the undertaking significantly contributes. If the
key action plan is part of a wider initiative, the undertaking may provide more information on the project, its
sponsors and other participants;
(f) a description of how it contributes to systemwide change, notably to alter the drivers of biodiversity and
ecosystem change, e.g., through technological, economic, institutional, and social factors and changes in
underlying values and behaviours;
AR 21. In the context of this Disclosure Requirement, “local and indigenous knowledge” refer to the understandings, skills
and philosophies developed by societies with long histories of interaction with their natural surroundings. For
rural and indigenous peoples, local knowledge informs decision-making about fundamental aspects of day-to-day
life.
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement E4-4 – Targets related to biodiversity and ecosystems
AR 22. The undertaking may specify whether the target addresses shortcomings related to the Substantial Contribution
criteria for Biodiversity as defined in the delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 15(2) of Regulation
(EU) 2020/852. Where the Do No Significant Harm (DNSH) criteria for Biodiversity as defined in delegated acts
adopted pursuant to Article 10(3), Article 11(3), Article 12(2), Article 13(2), and Article 14(2) of Regulation
(EU) 2020/852 are not met, the undertaking may specify whether the target addresses shortcomings related those
DNSH critera.
AR 23. When disclosing information required under paragraph 29 for the purpose of setting targets the undertaking shall
consider the need for an informed and willing consent of local and indigenous peoples, the need for appropriate
consultations and the need to respect the decisions of these communities.
AR 24. The targets related to material impacts may be presented in a table as illustrated below:
Target value and geographical Connected policy or
scope legislation if relevant
Baseline value
Type of target according to mitigation hierarchy
and base year
Up to
2025 2030
2050
Avoidance
Minimisation
Rehabilitation and restoration
Compensation or offsets
148/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 25. The targets related to the potentially material sustainability matters listed in paragraph AR 4 of this Standard, may
be presented in a table as illustrated below:
Type of target Target value and geographical scope
Baseline value and Connected policy or
according to
base year legislation if relevant
sustainability matter 2025 2030 Up to 2050
AR 26. Measurable targets related to biodiversity and ecosystems may be expressed as:
(a) size and location of all habitat areas protected or restored, whether directly or indirectly controlled by the
undertaking, and whether the success of the restoration measure was or is approved by independent external
professionals;
(b) recreated surfaces (environments in which management initiatives are implemented so as to create a habitat on
a site where it did not exist initially); or
(c) number or percentage of projects / sites whose ecological integrity was improved (e.g., installation of fish
passes, wildlife corridors).
Disclosure Requirement E4-5 – Impact metrics related to biodiversity and ecosystems change
AR 27. When preparing the information required under this Disclosure Requirement, the undertaking shall consider and
may describe:
(a) the methodologies and metrics used and an explanation for why these methodologies and metrics are selected,
as well as their assumptions, limitations and uncertainties, and any changes in methodologies made over time
and why they occurred;
(b) the scope of the metrics and methodologies, for example:
i. undertaking, site, brand, commodity, corporate business unit, activity;
ii. aspects (as set out in paragraph AR 4) covered.
(c) the biodiversity components of the metrics: species specific, ecosystem specific;
(d) the geographies covered by the methodology and an explanation of why any relevant geographies were
omitted;
(e) how the metrics integrate ecological thresholds (e.g., the biosphere integrity and land-system change,
planetary boundaries) and allocations;
(f) the frequency of monitoring, key metrics being monitored, and the baseline condition/value and
baseline year/period, as well as the reference period;
(g) whether these metrics rely on primary data, secondary data, modelled data or on expert judgement, or a
mixture of these;
(h) an indication of which action is measured and monitored via the metrics and how they relate to the
achievement of targets;
(i) whether metrics are mandatory (required by legislation) or voluntary. If they are mandatory, the undertaking
may indicate the relevant legislation; if voluntary, the undertaking may refer to any voluntary standard or
procedure used; and
(j) whether the metrics are informed by or correspond to expectations or recommendations of relevant and
authoritative national, EU-level or intergovernmental guidelines, policies, legislation or agreements, such as
the Convention for Biological Diversity (CBD) or IPBES.
AR 28. The undertaking shall disclose metrics that are verifiable and that are technically and scientifically robust
considering the appropriate time scales geographies, and may disclose how its selected metrics correspond to
those criteria. To ensure that the metric is relevant there should be a clear relationship between the indicator and
the purpose of the measurement. Uncertainties should be reduced as far as possible. Data or mechanisms used
should be supported by well-established organisations and updated over time. Robust modelled data and expert
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 149/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
judgment can be used where data gaps exist. The methodology shall be sufficiently detailed to allow for meaningful
comparison of impacts and mitigation activities over time. Information gathering processes and definitions must
be systematically applied. This enables a meaningful review of the undertaking’s performance over time and helps
internal and peer comparison.
AR 29. If a metric corresponds to a target, the baseline for both shall be aligned. The biodiversity baseline is an essential
component of the larger biodiversity and ecosystems management process. The baseline is necessary to inform
impact assessment and management planning, as well as monitoring and adaptive management.
AR 30. Methodologies available to collect data and measure the undertakings’ impacts on biodiversity and ecosystems
may be separated into three categories as follows:
(a) primary data: collected in-situ using on the ground surveys;
(b) secondary data: including geospatial data layers that are overlaid with geographic location data of business
activities.
i. At the species level, data layers on the ranges of different species can be used to predict the species that may
be present at different locations. This includes operation sites and sourcing locations. Different range layers
will have different levels of accuracy depending on certain factors (e.g., whether species ranges have been
refined based on availability of habitat). Information on the threat status of the species, and the activities
that threaten them, can provide an indication of the likely contribution that business activities may be
having on driving population trends and threat status.
ii. At the ecosystem level, data layers reflecting change in the extent and condition of ecosystems can be
applied, including levels of habitat fragmentation and connectivity.
(c) modelled biodiversity state data: Model-based approaches are commonly used for measuring ecosystem level
indicators (e.g., extent, condition, or function). Models quantify how the magnitude of different pressures
affects the state of biodiversity. These are referred to as pressure-state relationships and are based on globally
collected data. Modelling results are applied locally to estimate how undertaking-level pressures will cause
changes in ecosystem condition.An impact driver generally has three main characteristics: magnitude (e.g.,
amount of contaminant, noise intensity), spatial extent (e.g., area of land contaminated) and temporal extent
(duration of persistence of contaminant).
AR 31. With regard to life cycle assessment for land-use, the undertaking may refer to the “Land-use related environmental
indicators for Life Cycle Assessment” by the Joint Research Center.
AR 32. With regard to the introduction of invasive alien species, the undertaking may disclose the pathways and number
of invasive alien species and the extent of surface covered by invasive alien species.
AR 33. With regard to metrics on the extent and condition of ecosystems, useful guidance can be found in the work of the
United Nations System of Environmental Economic Accounting Ecosystem Accounting (UN SEEA EA).
AR 34. The undertaking may disclose in units of area (e.g., m2 or ha) on land-use using guidance provided by the Eco-
Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS)(82):
(a) total use of land;
(b) total sealed area;
(c) total nature-oriented area on site; and
(d) total nature-oriented area off site.
(82) As proposed by Commission Regulation (EU) 2018/ 2026 of 19 December 2018 amending Annex IV to Regulation (EC)
No 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-
management and audit scheme (EMAS) (OJ L 325, 20.12.2018, p. 18).
150/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 35. The undertaking may disclose, for example, land cover change, which is the physical representation of the drivers
“habitat modification” and “industrial and domestic activities”, i.e., the man-made or natural change of the
physical properties of the earth’s surface at a specific location.
AR 36. Land cover is a typical variable that can be assessed with earth observation data.
AR 37. When reporting on material impacts related to the ecosystems, the undertaking may, in addition to the extent and
condition of ecosystems, also consider the functioning of ecosystems by using:
(a) a metric that measures a process or function that the ecosystem completes, or that reflects the ability of the
ecosystem to undertake that specific process or function: e.g. net primary productivity, which is a measure of
plant productivity based on the rate at which energy is stored by plants and made available to other species in
the ecosystem. It is a core process that occurs for ecosystems to function. It is related to many factors, such as
species diversity, but does not measure these factors directly; or
(b) A metric that measures changes to the population of scientifically identified species under threat.
AR 38. At the ecosystem level, data layers reflecting change in the extent and condition of ecosystems may be applied,
including levels of habitat fragmentation and connectivity.
Disclosure Requirement E4-6 – Anticipated financial effects from material biodiversity and ecosystem-related risks and
opportunities
AR 39. The undertaking may include an assessment of its related products and services at risk over the short-, medium-
and long-term, explaining how these are defined, how financial amounts are estimated, and which critical
assumptions are made.
AR 40. The quantification of the anticipated financial effects in monetary terms under paragraph 45(a) may be a single
amount or a range.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 151/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
ESRS E5
RESOUCE USE AND CIRCULAR ECONOMY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Objective
Interactions with other ESRS
Disclosure Requirements
– ESRS 2 General disclosures
Impact, risk and opportunity management
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify and assess
material resource use and circular economy-related impacts, risks and opportunities
— Disclosure Requirement E5-1 – Policies related to resource use and circular economy
— Disclosure Requirement E5-2 – Actions and resources related to resource use and circular economy
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement E5-3 – Targets related to resource use and circular economy
— Disclosure Requirement E5-4 – Resource inflows
— Disclosure Requirement E5-5 – Resource outflows
— Disclosure Requirement E5-6 – Anticipated financial effects from resource use and circular economy-related
impacts, risks and opportunities
Appendix A: Application Requirements
– ESRS 2 General disclosures
Impact, risk and opportunity management
— Disclosure requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify and assess
material resource use and circular economy-related impacts, risks and opportunities
— Disclosure Requirement E5-1 – Policies related to resource use and circular economy
— Disclosure Requirement E5-2 – Actions and resources in relation to resource use and circular economy
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement E5-3 - Targets related to resource use and circular economy
— Disclosure Requirement E5-4 - Resource inflows
— Disclosure Requirement E5-5 - Resource outflows
— Disclosure Requirement E5-6 – Anticipated financial effects from resource use and circular economy-related
risks and opportunities
Objective
1. The objective of this Standard is to specify Disclosure Requirements which will enable users of the sustainability
statement to understand:
(a) how the undertaking affects resource use, including resource efficiency, avoiding the depletion of resources and
the sustainable sourcing and use of renewable resources (referred to in this Standard as “resource use and
circular economy”) in terms of material positive and negative actual or potential impacts;
(b) any actions taken, and the result of such actions, to prevent or mitigate actual or potential negative impacts
arising from resource use, including its measures to help decoupling its economic growth from the use of
materials, and to address risks and opportunities;
152/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(c) the plans and capacity of the undertaking to adapt its strategy and business model in line with circular economy
principles including but not limited to minimising waste, maintaining the value of products, materials and other
resources at their highest value and enhancing their efficient use in production and consumption;
(d) the nature, type and extent of the undertaking’s material risks and opportunities related to the undertaking’s
impacts and dependencies, arising from resource use and circular economy, and how the undertaking manages
them; and
(e) the financial effects on the undertaking over the short-, medium- and long-term of material risks and
opportunities arising from the undertaking’s impacts and dependencies on resource use and circular economy.
2. This Standard sets out Disclosure Requirements related to “resource use” and “circular economy” and in particular on:
(a) resource inflows including the circularity of material resource inflows, considering renewable and non-
renewable resources; and
(b) resource outflows including information on products and materials; and
(c) waste.
3. Circular economy means an economic system in which the value of products, materials and other resources in the
economy is maintained for as long as possible, enhancing their efficient use in production and consumption, thereby
reducing the environmental impact of their use, minimising waste and the release of hazardous substances at all
stages of their life cycle, including through the application of the waste hierarchy. The goal is to maximise and
maintain the value of the technical and biological resources, products and materials by creating a system that allows
for durability, optimal use or re-use, refurbishment, remanufacturing, recycling and nutrient cycling.
4. This Standard builds on relevant EU legislative frameworks and policies including the EU Circular Economy Action
Plan, Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council(83)(Waste Framework Directive) and the
EU industrial strategy.
5. To evaluate the transition from business as usual, meaning an economy in which finite resources are extracted to
make products that are used and then thrown away (“take-make-waste”), to a circular economic system, this
Standard relies on the identification of the physical flows of resources, materials and products used and generated by
the undertaking through Disclosure Requirement E5-4 Resource inflows and Disclosure Requirement E5-5 Resource
outflows.
Interactions with other ESRS
6. Resource use is a major driver of other environmental impacts such as climate change, pollution, water and marine
resources and biodiversity. A circular economy is a system that tends towards sustainable use of resources in
extraction, processing, production, consumption and management of waste. Such system brings multiple
environmental benefits, in particular, the reduction of material and energy consumption and emissions into the air
(greenhouse gas emissions or other pollution), the limitation of water withdrawals and discharges and the
regeneration of nature limiting the impact on biodiversity.
7. To provide a comprehensive overview of which other environmental matters could be material to resource use and
circular economy, relevant disclosure requirements are covered in other environmental ESRS as follows:
(a) ESRS E1 Climate change, which addresses, in particular, GHG emissions and energy resources (energy
consumption);
(b) ESRS E2 Pollution, which addresses, in particular, emissions to water, air and soil as well as substances of concern;
(83) Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives
(OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 153/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(c) ESRS E3 Water and marine resources, which addresses, in particular, water resource (water consumption) and
marine resources; and
(d) ESRS E4 Biodiversity and ecosystems, which addresses, in particular, ecosystems, species and raw materials.
8. The undertaking’s impacts related to resource use and circular economy, in particular impacts related to waste, can
affect people and communities. Material negative impacts on affected communities from resource use and circular
economy attributable to the undertaking are covered in ESRS S3 Affected communities. The efficient and circular use
of resources also benefits competitiveness and economic wellbeing
9. This Standard should be read in conjunction with ESRS 1 General requirements and ESRS 2 General disclosures.
Disclosure Requirements
ESRS 2 General disclosures
10. The requirements of this section should be read in conjunction with and reported alongside the disclosures required
by ESRS 2 chapter 4 Impact, risk and opportunity management.
Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify and assess material resource
use and circular economy-related impacts, risks and opportunities
11. The undertaking shall describe the process to identify material impacts, risks and opportunities related to resource
use and circular economy, in particular regarding resource inflows, resource outflows and waste, and shall provide
information on:
(a) whether the undertaking has screened its assets and activities in order to identify its actual and potential impacts,
risks and opportunities in its own operations and its upstream and downstream value chain, and if so, the
methodologies, assumptions and tools used in the screening;
(b) whether and how the undertaking has conducted consultations, in particular, with affected communities.
Disclosure Requirement E5-1 – Policies related to resource use and circular economy
12. The undertaking shall describe its policies adopted to manage its material impacts, risks and opportunities related to
resource use and circular economy.
13. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the extent to which the undertaking
has policies that address the identification, assessment, management and/or remediation of its material impacts,
risks and opportunities related to resource use and circular economy.
14. The disclosure required by paragraph 12 shall contain the information on the policies the undertaking has in place to
manage its material impacts, risks and opportunities related to resource use and circular economy in accordance
with ESRS 2 MDR-P Policies adopted to manage material sustainability matters.
15. In the summary, the undertaking shall indicate whether and how its policies address the following matters where
material:
(a) transitioning away from use of virgin resources, including relative increases in use of secondary (recycled)
resources;
(b) sustainable sourcing and use of renewable resources.
16. Policies shall address material impacts, risks and opportunities in its own operations and along its upstream and
downstream value chain.
154/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Disclosure Requirement E5-2 – Actions and resources related to resource use and circular economy
17. The undertaking shall disclose its resource use and circular economy actions and the resources allocated to their
implementation.
18. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the key actions taken and planned to
achieve the resource use and circular economy-related policy objectives and targets.
19. The description of the resource use and circular economy-related actions and resources allocated shall follow the
principles defined in ESRS 2 MDR-A Actions and resources in relation to material sustainability matters.
20. In addition to ESRS 2 MDR-A, the undertaking may specify whether and how an action and resources cover:
(a) higher levels of resource efficiency in use of technical and biological materials and water, particularly in relation
to critical raw materials and rare earths as listed in the Raw Materials Information System;
(b) higher rates of use of secondary raw materials (recyclates);
(c) application of circular design, leading to increased product durability and optimisation of use, and higher rates
of: Reuse, Repair, Refurbishing, Remanufacture, Repurposing and Recycling.
(d) application of circular business practices such as (i) value retention actions (maintenance, repair, refurbishing,
remanufacturing, component harvesting, upgrading and reverse logistics, closed loop systems, second-hand
retailing), (ii) value maximisation actions (product-service systems, collaborative and sharing economy business
models), (iii) end-of-life actions (recycling, upcycling, extended producer responsibility), and (iv) systems
efficiency actions (industrial symbiosis);
(e) actions taken to prevent waste generation in the undertaking’s upstream and downstream value chain; and
(f) optimistation of waste management in line with the waste hierarchy.
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement E5-3 – Targets related to resource use and circular economy
21. The undertaking shall disclose the resource use and circular economy-related targets it has set.
22. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the targets the undertaking has
adopted to support its resource use and circular economy policy and to address its material impacts, risks and
opportunities.
23. The description of the targets shall contain the information requirements defined in ESRS 2 MDR-T Tracking
effectiveness of policies and actions through targets.
24. The disclosure required by paragraph 21 shall indicate whether and how the undertaking’s targets relate to resource
inflows and resource outflows, including waste and products and materials, and, more specifically to:
(a) the increase of circular product design (including for instance design for durability, dismantling, reparability,
recyclability etc);
(b) the increase of circular material use rate;
(c) the minimisation of primary raw material;
(d) sustainable sourcing and use (in line with the cascading principle) of renewable resources;
(e) the waste management, including preparation for proper treatment; and
(f) other matters related to resource use or circular economy.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 155/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
25. The undertaking shall specify to which layer of the waste hierarchy the target relates.
26. In addition to ESRS 2 MDR-T, the undertaking may specify whether ecological thresholds and entity-specific
allocations were taken into consideration when setting targets. If so, the undertaking may specify:
(a) the ecological thresholds identified, and the methodology used to identify such thresholds;
(b) whether or not the thresholds are entity-specific and if so, how they were determined; and
(c) how responsibility for respecting identified ecological thresholds is allocated in the undertaking.
27. The undertaking shall specify as part of the contextual information, whether the targets it has set and presented are
mandatory (required by legislation) or voluntary.
Disclosure Requirement E5-4 – Resource inflows
28. The undertaking shall disclose information on its resource inflows related to its material impacts, risks and
opportunities.
29. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the resource use in the undertaking’s
own operations and its upstream value chain.
30. The disclosure required by paragraph 28 shall include a description of its resource inflows where material: products
(including packaging) and materials (specifying critical raw materials and rare earths), water and property, plant and
equipment used in the undertaking’s own operations and along its upstream value chain.
31. When an undertaking assesses that resource inflows is a material sustainability matter, it shall disclose the following
information about the materials used to manufacture the undertaking’s products and services during the reporting
period, in tonnes or kilogrammes:
(a) the overall total weight of products and technical and biological materials used during the reporting period;
(b) the percentage of biological materials (and biofuels used for non-energy purposes) used to manufacture the
undertaking’s products and services (including packaging) that is sustainably sourced, with the information on
the certification scheme used and on the application of the cascading principle; and
(c) the weight in both absolute value and percentage, of secondary reused or recycled components, secondary
intermediary products and secondary materials used to manufacture the undertaking’s products and services
(including packaging).
32. The undertaking shall provide information on the methodologies used to calculate the data. It shall specify whether
the data is sourced from direct measurement or estimations, and disclose the key assumptions used.
Disclosure Requirement E5-5 – Resource outflows
33. The undertaking shall disclose information on its resource outflows, including waste, related to its material impacts,
risks and opportunities.
34. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of:
(a) how the undertaking contributes to the circular economy by i) designing products and materials in line with
circular economy principles and ii) increasing or maximising the extent to which products, materials and waste
processing are recirculated in practice after first use; and
(b) the undertaking’s waste reduction and waste management strategy, the extent to which the undertaking knows
how its pre-consumer waste is managed in its own activities.
156/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Products and materials
35. The undertaking shall provide a description of the key products and materials that come out of the undertaking’s
production process and that are designed along circular principles, including durability, reusability, repairability,
disassembly, remanufacturing, refurbishment, recycling, recirculation by the biological cycle, or optimisation of the
use of the product or material through other circular business models.
36. Undertakings for which outflows are material shall disclose:
(a) The expected durability of the products placed on the market by the undertaking, in relation to the industry
average for each product group;
(b) The reparability products, using an established rating system, where possible;
(c) The rates of recyclable content in products and their packaging.
Waste
37. The undertaking shall disclose the following information on its total amount of waste from its own operations, in
tonnes or kilogrammes:
(a) the total amount of waste generated ;
(b) the total amount by weight diverted from disposal, with a breakdown between hazardous waste and non-
hazardous waste and a breakdown by the following recovery operation types:
i. preparation for reuse;
ii. recycling; and
iii. other recovery operations.
(c) the amount by weight directed to disposal by waste treatment type and the total amount summing all three types,
with a breakdown between hazardous waste and non-hazardous waste. The waste treatment types to be
disclosed are:
i. incineration;
ii. landfill; and
iii. other disposal operations;
(d) the total amount and percentage of non-recycled waste(84).
38. When disclosing the composition of the waste, the undertaking shall specify:
(a) the waste streams relevant to its sector or activities (e.g. tailings for the undertaking in the mining sector,
electronic waste for the undertaking in the consumer electronics sector, or food waste for the undertaking in the
agriculture or in the hospitality sector); and;
(b) the materials that are present in the waste (e.g. biomass, metals, non-metallic minerals, plastics, textiles, critical
raw materials and rare earths).
39. The undertaking shall also disclose the total amount of hazardous waste and radioactive waste generated by the
undertaking, where radioactive waste is defined in Article 3(7) of Council Directive 2011/70/Euratom(85).
(84) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #13 in Table II of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Non-recycled waste
ratio”).
(85) Council Directive 2011/70/Euratom of 19 July 2011 establishing a Community framework for the responsible and safe management
of spent fuel and radioactive waste (OJ L 199, 2.8.2011, p. 48). This information supports the information needs of financial market
participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is derived from a mandatory indicator related to principal adverse
impacts as set out by indicator #9 in Table I of Annex I of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to
disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Hazardous waste and radioactive waste ratio”).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 157/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
40. The undertaking shall provide contextual information on the methodologies used to calculate the data and in
particular the criteria and assumptions used to determine and classify products designed along circular principles
under paragraph 35. It shall specify whether the data is sourced from direct measurement or estimations; and
disclose the key assumptions used.
Disclosure Requirement E5-6 – Anticipated financial effects from material resource use and circular economy-related
risks and opportunities
41. The undertaking shall disclose the anticipated financial effects of material risks and opportunities arising from
resource use and circular economy-related impacts.
42. The information required by paragraph 41 is in addition the information on current financial effects on the entity’s
financial position, financial performance and cash flows for the reporting period required under ESRS 2 SBM-3 para
48 (d). The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of:
(a) anticipated financial effects due to material risks arising from material resource use and circular economy-
related impacts and dependencies and how these risks have or could reasonably be expected to have) a material
influence on the undertaking’s financial position, financial performance performance, and cash flows over the
short-, medium- and long-term; and
(b) anticipated financial effects due to material opportunities related to resource use and circular economy.
43. The disclosure shall include:
(a) a quantification of the anticipated financial effects in monetary terms before considering resource use and
circular economy-related actions, or where not possible without undue cost or effort, qualitative information.
For financial effects arising from material opportunities, a quantification is not required if it would result in
disclosure that does not meet the qualitative characteristics of information (see ESRS 1 Appendix B Qualitative
characteristics of information);
(b) a description of the effects considered, the impacts and dependencies to which they relate and the time horizons
in which they are likely to materialise;
(c) the critical assumptions used to quantify the anticipated financial effects, as well as the sources and level of
uncertainty of those assumptions.
158/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix A
Application Requirements
This appendix is an integral part of the ESRS E5. It supports the application of the disclosure requirements set out in this
standard and has the same authority as the other parts of the standard.
ESRS 2 GENERAL DISCLOSURES
Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify and assess material resource
use and circular economy-related impacts, risks and opportunities
AR 1. When conducting a materiality assessment on environmental subtopics, the undertaking shall assess the
materiality of resource use and circular economy in its own operations and its upstream and downstream value
chain, and may consider the four phases below, also known as the LEAP approach:
(a) Phase 1: locate where in the undertaking’s own operations and along its upstream and downstream value
chain the interface with nature takes place;
(b) Phase 2: evaluate the dependencies and impacts;
(c) Phase 3: assess the material risks and opportunities;
(d) Phase 4: prepare and report the results of the materiality assessment.
AR 2. With regard to ESRS E5, phases 1 and 2 rely mainly on the materiality assessments conducted under ESRS E1
(including energy consumption), ESRS E2 (pollution), ESRS E3 (marine resources, water consumption) and ESRS
E4 (biodiversity, ecosystems, raw materials). Indeed, circular economy eventually aims at reducing the
environmental impact of the use of products, materials and other resources, minimizing waste and the release of
hazardous substances and hence at reducing impacts on nature. This application requirement focuses mainly on
the third phase of this LEAP approach, while the fourth phase addresses the outcome of the process.
AR 3. The process to assess the materiality of impacts, dependencies, risks and opportunities shall consider the
provisions in ESRS 2 IRO-1 Description of the processes to identify and assess material impacts, risks and opportunities
and IRO-2 Disclosure Requirements in ESRS covered by the undertaking’s sustainability statement.
AR 4. The sub-topics related to resource use and circular economy covered by the materiality assessment include:
(a) resource inflows including the circularity of material resource inflows, considering resource use optimisation,
intensity of materials and products and renewable and non-renewable resources;
(b) resource outflows related to products and services; and
(c) waste, including hazardous waste and non-hazardous waste management.
AR 5. In Phase 3, to assess its material risks and opportunities based on the results of Phases 1 and 2, the undertaking
may:
(a) identify transition risks and opportunities in its own operations and its upstream and downstream value
chain, including the risk of staying in a business-as-usual scenario:
i. policy and legal, e.g., bans on the extraction and use of non-renewable resources, regulations on waste
treatment;
ii. technology, e.g., introduction on the market of new technologies to replace existing use of products and
materials;
iii. market, e.g., shifting supply, demand and financing;
iv. reputation, e.g. changing societal, customer or community perceptions.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 159/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) identify physical risks including depletion of stock and use of virgin and non-virgin renewable resources, and
of non-renewable resources;
(c) identify opportunities categorised by:
i. resource efficiency: e.g., transition to more efficient services and processes requiring less resources, eco-
design for longevity, repair, reuse, recycle, by- products, take-back systems, decoupling activity from
extraction of materials, intensifying circular material use, creation of a system that allows for demateria­
lization (e.g., digitisation, improving utilisation rates, weight reduction); practices to ensure products and
materials are collected, sorted, and reused, repaired, refurbished, remanufactured;
ii. markets: e.g., demand for less resource-intense products and services, and new consumption models such
as product-as- a-service, pay-per-use, sharing, leasing;
iii. financing: e.g., access to green funds, bonds or loans;
iv. resilience: e.g., diversification of resources and business activities (e.g., start a new business unit to recycle
new materials), investing in green infrastructures, adopting recycling and circularity mechanisms that
reduce the dependencies, capability of the undertaking to safeguard future stocks and flows of resources;
and
v. reputation.
AR 6. The undertaking may consider the following methodologies to assess its impacts, risks and opportunities in its
own operations and along its upstream and downstream value chain:
(a) Commission Recommendation 2021/2279 on the use of the Environmental Footprint methods to measure
and communicate the life cycle environmental performance of products and organizations (Annex I – Product
Environmental Footprint; Annex III – Organisation Environmental Footprint); and
(b) Material Flow Analysis (MFA) from the European Environment Agency.
AR 7. When providing information on the outcome of the materiality assessment, the undertaking shall consider:
(a) a list of business units associated to resource use and circular economy material impacts, risks and
opportunities in the context of the products and services of the undertaking and the waste it generates;
(b) a list and prioritisation of the material resources used by the undertaking;
(c) the material impacts and risks of staying in business as usual;
(d) the material opportunities related to a circular economy;
(e) the material impacts and risks of a transition to a circular economy; and
(f) the stages of the value chain where resource use, risks and negative impacts are concentrated.
Disclosure Requirement E5-1 – Policies related to resource use and circular economy
AR 8. The policies described under this Disclosure Requirement may be integrated in broader environmental or
sustainability policies covering different subtopics.
AR 9. When providing information on its policies, the undertaking shall consider whether and how its policies address:
(a) the waste hierarchy: (a) prevention; (b) preparing for re-use; (c) recycling; (d) other recovery, e.g., energy
recovery; and (e) disposal. In this context, the waste treatment cannot be considered as a recovery;
160/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) the prioritisation of the avoidance or minimisation waste (Re-use, Repair, Refurbish, Remanufacture and
Repurpose) over waste treatment (Recycling). The concepts of eco-design(86), waste as a resource or post-
consumer waste (at the end of a consumer-product lifecycle), should also be taken into consideration.
AR 10. When defining its policies, the undertaking may consider the Paper on “Categorisation system for the circular
economy”, which describes circular design and production models, circular use models, circular value recovery
models and circular support along the principles of the nine circular economy “R” strategies or principles: refuse,
rethink, reduce, re-use, repair, refurbish, remanufacture, repurpose and recycle.
Disclosure Requirement E5-2 – Actions and resources in relation to resource use and circular economy
AR 11. When providing information under paragraph 17 and considering that resources are shared and that circular
economy strategies may require collective actions, the undertaking may specify the actions taken to engage with
its upstream and downstream value chain and/or its local network on the development of collaborations or
initiatives increasing the circularity of products and materials.
AR 12. In particular, the undertaking may specify the following:
(a) how it contributes to circular economy, including for instance smart waste collection systems;
(b) the other stakeholders involved in the collective actions: competitors, suppliers, retailers, customers, other
business partners, local communities and authorities, government agencies;
(c) a description of the organisation of the collaboration or initiative, including the specific contribution of the
undertaking and the roles of the different stakeholders in the project.
AR 13. The actions may cover the undertaking’s own operations and/or its upstream and downstream value chain.
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement E5-3 - Targets related to resource use and circular economy
AR 14. If the undertaking refers to ecological thresholds to set targets, it may refer to the guidance provided by the
Science-Based Targets Initiative for Nature (SBTN) in its interim guidance (Initial Guidance for Business, September
2020) or any other guidance with a scientifically acknowledged methodology that allows to set science-based
targets by identifying ecological thresholds and, if applicable, organisation-specific allocations. Ecological
thresholds can be local, national and/or global.
AR 15. When providing information on targets, the undertaking shall prioritise targets in absolute value.
AR 16. When providing information targets according to paragraph 24, the undertaking shall consider the production
phase, the use phase, and the end of functional life of products and materials.
AR 17. When providing information on targets related to virgin renewable raw material under paragraph 24(c), the
undertaking shall consider how those targets may impact biodiversity loss, also in light of ESRS E4.
(86) As established by Directive 2009/125/EC.Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009
establishing a framework for the setting of ecodesign requirements for energy-related products (OJ L 285, 31.10.2009, p. 10).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 161/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 18. The undertaking may disclose other targets under paragraph 24(f) including in relation to sustainable sourcing. If
so, the undertaking shall explain the definition of sustainable sourcing it has adopted and how it relates to the
objective set out in paragraph 22.
AR 19. The targets may cover the undertaking’s own operations and/or its upstream and downstream value chain.
AR 20. The undertaking may specify whether the target addresses shortcomings related to the Substantial Contribution
criteria for Circular Economy as defined in the delegated acts adopted pursuant to Article 13(2) of Regulation
(EU) 2020/852. Where the Do No Significant Harm (DNSH) criteria for Circular Economy as defined in delegated
acts adopted pursuant to Article 10(3), Article 11(3), Article 12(2), Article 14(2), and Article 15(2) of Regulation
(EU) 2020/852 are not met, the undertaking may specify whether the target addresses shortcomings related those
DNSH criteria.
Disclosure Requirement E5-4 - Resource inflows
AR 21. Resource inflows may cover the following categories: IT equipment, textiles, furniture, buildings, heavy machinery,
mid-weight machinery, light machinery, heavy transport, mid-weight transport, light transport and warehousing
equipment. With regard to materials, resource inflow indicators include raw materials, associated process
materials, and semi-manufactured goods or parts.
AR 22. When the undertaking is subject to paragraph 31, it may also provide transparency on the materials that are
sourced from by-products/waste stream (e.g., offcuts of a material that has not previously been in a product).
AR 23. The denominator of the percentage indicator required under paragraphs 31(b) and 31(c) is the overall total weight
of materials used during the reporting period.
AR 24. The reported usage data are to reflect the material in its original state, and not to be presented with further data
manipulation, such as reporting it as “dry weight”.
AR 25. In cases where there is an overlap between categories of reused, recycled, the undertaking shall specify how double
counting was avoided and the choices that were made.
Disclosure Requirement E5-5 - Resource outflows
AR 26. Products and materials information to be provided under paragraph 35 refers to all materials and products that
come out of the undertaking’s production process and that a company puts on the market (including packaging).
AR 27. When compiling the rate, the undertaking shall use as denominator the overall total weight of materials used
during the reporting period.
AR 28. The undertaking may disclose its engagement in product end-of-life waste management, for example through
extended producer responsibility schemes or take-back schemes.
AR 29. Type of waste is to be understood as hazardous waste or non-hazardous waste. Some specific waste, such as
radioactive waste, may also be presented as a separate type.
AR 30. When considering the waste streams relevant to its sectors or activities, the undertaking may consider the list of
waste descriptions from the European Waste Catalogue.
AR 31. Examples of other types of recovery operations under paragraph 37(b)iii may be found in Annex II of
Directive 2008/98/EC (Waste Framework Directive).
AR 32. Examples of other types of disposal operations under paragraph 37(c)iii may be found in Annex I of
Directive 2008/98/EC (Waste Framework Directive).
162/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 33. When providing contextual information under paragraph 40 the undertaking may:
(a) explain the reasons for high weights of waste directed to disposal (e.g., local regulations that prohibit landfill of
specific types of waste);
(b) describe sector practices, sector standards, or external regulations that mandate a specific disposal operation;
and
(c) specify whether the data has been modelled or sourced from direct measurements, such as waste transfer notes
from contracted waste collectors.
Disclosure Requirement E5-6 – Anticipated financial effects from material resource use and circular economy-related
risks and opportunities
AR 34. When providing information under paragraph 42(b), the undertaking may illustrate and describe how it intends to
strengthen value retention.
AR 35. The undertaking may include an assessment of its related products and services at risk over the short-, medium-
and long-term, explaining how these are defined, how financial amounts are estimated, and which critical
assumptions are made.
AR 36. The quantification of the anticipated financial effects in monetary terms under paragraph 43(a) may be a range.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 163/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
ESRS S1
OWN WORKFORCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Objective
Interaction with other ESRS
Disclosure requirements
– ESRS 2 General disclosures
Strategy
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-2 – Interests and views of stakeholders
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 – Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their
interaction with strategy and business model
Impacts, risks and opportunities management
— Disclosure Requirement S1-1 – Policies related to own workforce
— Disclosure Requirement S1-2 – Processes for engaging with own workers and workers’ representatives about
impacts
— Disclosure Requirement S1-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for own workers to
raise concerns
— Disclosure Requirement S1-4 – Taking action on material impacts on own workforce, and approaches to
mitigating material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to own workforce, and effectiveness of
those actions
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement S1-5 – Targets related to managing material negative impacts, advancing positive
impacts, and managing material risks and opportunities
— Disclosure Requirement S1-6 – Characteristics of the undertaking’s employees
— Disclosure Requirement S1-7 – Characteristics of non-employee workers in the undertaking’s own
workforce
— Disclosure Requirement S1-8 – Collective bargaining coverage and social dialogue
— Disclosure Requirement S1-9 – Diversity metrics
— Disclosure Requirement S1-10 – Adequate wages
— Disclosure Requirement S1-11 – Social protection
— Disclosure Requirement S1-12– Persons with disabilities
— Disclosure Requirement S1-13 – Training and skills development metrics
— Disclosure Requirement S1-14 – Health and safety metrics
— Disclosure Requirement S1-15 – Work-life balance metrics
— Disclosure Requirement S1-16 – Compensation metrics (pay gap and total compensation)
— Disclosure Requirement S1-17 – Incidents, complaints and severe human rights impacts
Appendix A: Application Requirements
– Objective
– ESRS 2 General Disclosures
Strategy
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-2 – Interests and views of stakeholders
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 – Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their
interaction of with strategy and business model
164/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Impacts, risks and opportunities management
— Disclosure Requirement S1-1 – Policies related to own workforce
— Disclosure Requirement S1-2 – Processes for engaging with own workers and workers' representatives about
impacts
— Disclosure Requirement S1- 3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for own workers to
raise concerns
— Disclosure Requirement S1-4 – Taking action on material impacts and approaches to mitigating material
risks and pursuing material opportunities related to own workforce, and effectiveness of those actions and
approaches
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement S1-5 – Targets related to managing material impacts, advancing positive impacts, as
well as to risks and opportunities
— Disclosure Requirement S1-6 – Characteristics of the Undertaking’s Employees
— Disclosure Requirement S1-7 – Characteristics of non-employee workers in the undertaking’s own
workforce
— Disclosure Requirement S1-8 – Collective bargaining coverage and social dialogue
— Disclosure Requirement S1-9 – Diversity metrics
— Disclosure Requirement S1-10 – Adequate Wages
— Disclosure Requirement S1-11 – Social protection
— Disclosure Requirement S1-12 – Persons with disabilities
— Disclosure Requirement S1-13 – Training and Skills Development metrics
— Disclosure Requirement S1-14 – Health and safety metrics
— Disclosure Requirement S1-15 – Work-life balance
— Disclosure Requirement S1-16 – Remuneration metrics (pay gap and total remuneration)
— Disclosure Requirement S1-17 – Incidents, complaints and severe human rights impacts
Appendix A.1: Application Requirements for ESRS 2 related disclosures
Appendix A.2: Application Requirements for ESRS S1-1 Policies related to own workforce
Appendix A.3: Application Requirements for ESRS S1–4 Taking action on material impacts on own workforce, and
approaches to mitigating material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to own workforce, and
effectiveness of those actions
Appendix A.4: Application Requirements for ESRS S1–5 Targets related to managing material negative impacts, advancing
positive impacts, and managing material risks and opportunities
Objective
1. The objective of this Standard is to specify disclosure requirements which will enable users of the sustainability
statement to understand the undertaking’s material impacts on its own workforce, as well as related material risks
and opportunities, including:
(a) how the undertaking affects its own workforce, in terms of material positive and negative actual or potential
impacts;
(b) any actions taken, and the result of such actions, to prevent, mitigate or remediate actual or potential negative
impacts, and to address risks and opportunities;
(c) the nature, type and extent of the undertaking’s material risks and opportunities related to its impacts and
dependencies on its own workforce, and how the undertaking manages them; and
(d) the financial effects on the undertaking over the short-, medium- and long-term of material risks and
opportunities arising from the undertaking’s impacts and dependencies on its own workforce.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 165/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
2. In order to meet the objective, this Standard also requires an explanation of the general approach the undertaking
takes to identify and manage any material actual and potential impacts on its own workforce in relation to the
following social, including human rights, factors or matters:
(a) working conditions, including:
i. secure employment;
ii. working time;
iii. adequate wages;
iv. social dialogue;
v. freedom of association, the existence of works councils and the information, consultation and participation
rights of workers;
vi. collective bargaining, including the rate of the undertaking’s workforce covered by collective agreements;
vii. work-life balance; and
viii. health and safety.
(b) equal treatment and opportunities for all, including:
i. gender equality and equal pay for work of equal value;
ii. training and skills development;
iii. employment and inclusion of persons with disabilities;
iv. measures against violence and harassment in the workplace; and
v. diversity.
(c) other work-related rights, including those that relate to:
i. child labour;
ii. forced labour;
iii. adequate housing; and
iv. privacy.
3. This Standard also requires an explanation of how such impacts, as well as the undertaking’s dependencies on its own
workforce, can create material risks or opportunities for the undertaking. For example, on the matter of equal
opportunities, discrimination in hiring and promotion against women can reduce the undertaking’s access to
qualified labour and harm its reputation. Conversely, policies to increase the representation of women in the
workforce and in upper levels of management can have positive effects, such as increasing the pool of qualified
labour and improving the undertaking’s reputation.
4. This Standard covers an undertaking’s own workforce, which is understood to include both people who are in an
employment relationship with the undertaking (“employees”) and non-employees who are either people with
contracts with the undertaking to supply labour (“self-employed people”) or people provided by undertakings
primarily engaged in “employment activities” (NACE Code N78). See Application Requirement 3 for examples of
who falls under own workforce. The information required to be disclosed with regard to non-employees shall not
affect their status pursuant to applicable labour law.
5. This Standard does not cover workers in the undertaking’s upstream or downstream value chain; these categories of
workers are covered in ESRS S2 Workers in the value chain.
6. The Standard requires undertakings to describe their own workforce, including key characteristics of the employees
and non-employees that are part of it. This description provides users with an understanding of the structure of the
undertaking’s own workforce and helps to contextualise information provided through other disclosures.
166/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
7. The objective of the Standard is also to enable users to understand the extent to which the undertaking aligns or
complies with international and European human rights instruments and conventions, including the International
Bill of Human Rights, the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights and the OECD Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises, the International Labour Organization’s Declaration on Fundamental Principles and
Rights at Work and ILO fundamental conventions, the UN Convention on Persons with Disabilities, the European
Convention of Human Rights, the revised European Social Charter, the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
European Union, the EU policy priorities as set out by the European Pillar of Social Rights, and Union legislation,
including the EU labour law acquis.
Interaction with other ESRS
8. This Standard shall be read in conjunction with ESRS 1 General principles and ESRS 2 General requirements.
9. This Standard shall be read in conjunction with ESRS S2 Workers in the value chain, ESRS S3 Affected communities and
ESRS S4 Consumers and end-users.
10. The reporting under this Standard shall be consistent, coherent and where relevant clearly linked with reporting on
the undertaking’s own workforce under ESRS S2, in order to ensure effective reporting.
Disclosure requirements
ESRS 2 General disclosures
11. The requirements of this section should be read in conjunction with the disclosures required by ESRS 2 on Strategy
(SBM). The resulting disclosures shall be presented alongside the disclosures required by ESRS 2, except for ESRS 2
SBM-3, for which the undertaking has an option to present the disclosures alongside the topical disclosure.
Strategy
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-2 – Interests and views of stakeholders
12. When responding to ESRS 2 SBM-2, the undertaking shall disclose how the interests, views, and rights of people in its
own workforce, including respect for their human rights, inform its strategy and business model. The undertaking’s
own workforce is a key group of affected stakeholders.
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 – Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their
interaction with strategy and business model
13. When responding to ESRS 2 SBM-3 paragraph 48, the undertaking shall disclose:
(a) whether and how actual and potential impacts on its own workforce as identified in ESRS 2 IRO-1 Description of
the processes to identify and assess material impacts, risks and opportunities: (i) originate from or are connected to the
undertaking’s strategy and business models, and (ii) inform and contribute to adapting the undertaking’s
strategy and business model; and
(b) the relationship between its material risks and opportunities arising from impacts and dependencies on own
workforce and its strategy and business model.
14. When fulfilling the requirements of paragraph 48, the undertaking shall disclose whether all people in its own
workforce who could be materially impacted by the undertaking are included in the scope of its disclosure under
ESRS 2. These material impacts shall include impacts that are connected with the undertaking’s own operations and
its value chain, including through its products or services, as well as through its business relationships. In addition,
the undertaking shall provide the following information:
(a) a brief description of the types of employees and non-employees in its own workforce subject to material impacts
by its operations, and specify whether they are employees, self- employed people, or people provided by third
party undertakings primarily engaged in employment activities;
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 167/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) in the case of material negative impacts, whether they are either (i) widespread or systemic in contexts where the
undertaking operates (for example, child labour or forced labour or compulsory labour in specific countries or
regions outside the EU), or (ii) related to individual incidents (for example, an industrial accident or an oil spill);
(c) in the case of material positive impacts, a brief description of the activities that result in the positive impacts, the
types of employees and non-employees in its own workforce that are positively affected or could be positively
affected; the undertaking may also disclose whether the positive impacts occur in specific countries or regions;
(d) any material risks and opportunities for the undertaking arising from impacts and dependencies on its own
workforce;
(e) any material impacts on its own workforce that may arise from transition plans for reducing negative impacts on
the environment and achieving greener and climate- neutral operations, including information on the impacts on
own workforce caused by the undertaking’s plans and actions to reduce carbon emissions in line with
international agreements. Impacts, risks and opportunities include restructuring and employment loss as well as
opportunities arising from job creation and reskilling or upskilling;
(f) operations at significant risk of incidents of forced labour or compulsory labour(87)either in terms of:
i. type of operation (such as manufacturing plant); or
ii. countries or geographic areas with operations considered at risk;
(g) operations at significant risk of incidents of child labour(88)either in terms of:
i. type of operation (such as manufacturing plant); or
ii. countries or geographic areas with operations considered at risk.
15. In describing the main types of people in its own workforce who are or could be negatively affected, based on the
materiality assessment set out in ESRS 2 IRO 1, the undertaking shall disclose whether and how it has developed an
understanding of how people with particular characteristics, those working in particular contexts, or those
undertaking particular activities may be at greater risk of harm.
16. The undertaking shall disclose which, if any, of its material risks and opportunities arising from impacts and
dependencies on people in its own workforce relate to specific groups of people (for example, particular age groups,
or people working in a particular factory or country) rather than to all of its own workforce (for example, a general
pay cut, or training offered to all people in its own workforce).
Impacts, risks and opportunities management
Disclosure Requirement S1-1 – Policies related to own workforce
17. The undertaking shall describe its policies adopted to manage its material impacts on its own workforce, as
well as associated material risks and opportunities.
18. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the extent to which the undertaking
has policies that address the identification, assessment, management and/or remediation of material impacts on the
undertaking’s own workforce specifically, as well as policies that cover material impacts, risks and opportunities
related to its own workforce.
(87) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from additional indicators related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #13 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Operations and
suppliers at significant risk of incidents of forced or compulsory labour”).
(88) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from additional indicators related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #12 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Operations and
suppliers at significant risk of incidents of child labour”).
168/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
19. The disclosure required by paragraph 17 shall contain the information on the undertaking’s policies to manage its
material impacts, risks and opportunities related to its own workforce in accordance with ESRS 2 MDR-P Policies
adopted to manage material sustainability matters. In addition, the undertaking shall specify if such policies cover
specific groups within its own workforce or all of its own workforce.
20. The undertaking shall describe its human rights policy commitments(89) that are relevant to its own workforce,
including those processes and mechanisms to monitor compliance with the UN Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights, ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and the OECD Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises(90). In its disclosure it shall focus on those matters that are material in relation to, as well
as its general approach to:
(a) respect for the human rights, including labour rights, of people in its own workforce;
(b) engagement with people in its own workforce; and
(c) measures to provide and/or enable remedy for human rights impacts.
21. The undertaking shall disclose whether and how its policies with regard to its own workforce are aligned with
relevant internationally recognised instruments, including the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human
Rights(91).
22. The undertaking shall state whether its policies in relation to its own workforce explicitly address trafficking in
human beings(92), forced labour or compulsory labour and child labour.
23. The undertaking shall state whether it has a workplace accident prevention policy or management system(93).
24. The undertaking shall disclose:
(a) whether it has specific policies aimed at the elimination of discrimination, including harassment, promoting
equal opportunities and other ways to advance diversity and inclusion;
(b) whether the following grounds for discrimination are specifically covered in the policy: racial and ethnic origin,
colour, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability, age, religion, political opinion, national extraction or
social origin, or other forms of discrimination covered by Union regulation and national law;
(c) whether the undertaking has specific policy commitments related to inclusion or positive action for people from
groups at particular risk of vulnerability in its own workforce and, if so, what these commitments are; and
(d) whether and how these policies are implemented through specific procedures to ensure discrimination is
prevented, mitigated and acted upon once detected, as well as to advance diversity and inclusion in general.
(89) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #9 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Lack of a human
rights policy”).
(90) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from a mandatory indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #11 in Table I of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments.
(91) This information supports the needs of benchmark administrators to disclose ESG factors subject to Regulation (EU) 2020/1816 as set
out by indicator “Exposure of the benchmark portfolio to companies without due diligence policies on issues addressed by the
fundamental International Labour Organisation Conventions 1 to 8” in section 1 and 2 of Annex II.
(92) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #11 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Lack of processes
and measures for preventing trafficking in human beings”).
(93) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impact as set out by indicator #1 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Investments in
companies without workplace accident prevention policies”).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 169/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Disclosure Requirement S1-2 – Processes for engaging with own workforce and workers’ representatives about impacts
25. The undertaking shall disclose its general processes for engaging with people in its own workforce and
workers' representatives about actual and potential impacts on its own workforce.
26. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of how the undertaking engages, as part
of its ongoing due diligence process, with people in its own workforce and workers' representatives about material,
actual and potential, positive and/or negative impacts that do or are likely to affect them, and whether and how
perspectives of its own workforces are taken into account in the decision-making processes of the undertaking.
27. The undertaking shall disclose whether and how the perspectives of its own workforce inform its decisions or
activities aimed at managing the actual and potential impacts on its own workforce. This shall include, where
relevant, an explanation of:
(a) whether engagement occurs directly with the undertaking’s own workforce or workers' representatives;
(b) the stage(s) at which engagement occurs, the type of engagement and frequency of the engagement;
(c) the function and the most senior role within the undertaking that has operational responsibility for ensuring that
this engagement happens and that the results inform the undertaking’s approach;
(d) where applicable, a Global Framework Agreement or other agreements that the undertaking has with workers'
representatives related to the respect of human rights of its own workforce, including an explanation of how the
agreement enables the undertaking to gain insight into the perspectives of its own workforce; and
(e) where applicable, how the undertaking assesses the effectiveness of its engagement with its own workforce,
including, where relevant, any agreements or outcomes that result.
28. Where applicable, the undertaking shall disclose the steps it takes to gain insight into the perspectives of people in its
own workforce who may be particularly vulnerable to impacts and/or marginalised (for example, women, migrants,
people with disabilities).
29. If the undertaking cannot disclose the above required information because it has not adopted a general process to
engage with its own workforce, it shall disclose this to be the case. It may disclose a timeframe in which it aims to
have such a process in place.
Disclosure Requirement S1-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for own workforce to raise
concerns
30. The undertaking shall describe the processes it has in place to provide for or cooperate in the remediation
of negative impacts on people in its own workforce that the undertaking is connected with, as well as
channels available to its own workforce to raise concerns and have them addressed.
31. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the formal means by which the
undertaking’s own workforce can make their concerns and needs known directly to the undertaking and/or through
which the undertaking supports the availability of such channels (for example, grievance mechanisms) in the
workplace, and how follow up is carried out with the people concerned regarding the issues raised and the
effectiveness of these channels.
32. The undertaking shall describe the processes in place to cover the matters defined within paragraph 2 of the
Objective section by disclosing the following information:
(a) its general approach to and processes for providing or contributing to remedy where it has caused or contributed
to a material negative impact on people in its own workforce, including whether and how the undertaking
assesses that the remedy provided is effective;
170/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) any specific channels it has in place for its own workforce to raise their concerns or needs directly with the
undertaking and have them addressed, including whether these are established by the undertaking itself and/or
through participation in third-party mechanisms;
(c) whether or not the undertaking has a grievance/complaints handling mechanism related to employee
matters(94); and
(d) the processes through which the undertaking supports the availability of such channels in the workplace of its
own workforce; and
(e) how it tracks and monitors issues raised and addressed, and, how it ensures the effectiveness of the channels,
including through the involvement of stakeholders who are intended users.
33. The undertaking shall disclose whether and how it assesses that people in its own workforce are aware of, and trust,
these structures or processes as a way to raise their concerns or needs and have them addressed. In addition, the
undertaking shall disclose whether it has policies in place regarding the protection of individuals that use them,
including workers’ representatives, against retaliation. If such information has been disclosed in accordance with
ESRS G1-1, the undertaking may refer to that information.
34. If the undertaking cannot disclose the above required information because it has not adopted a channel for raising
concerns and/or does not support the availability of such a channel in the workplace for its own workforce, it shall
disclose this to be the case. It may disclose a timeframe in which it aims to have such a channel in place.
Disclosure Requirement S1-4 – Taking action on material impacts on own workforce, and approaches to managing
material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to own workforce, and effectiveness of those actions
35. The undertaking shall disclose how it takes action to address material negative and positive impacts, and to
manage material risks and pursue material opportunities related to its own workforce, and the effectiveness
of those actions.
36. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is twofold. Firstly, it is to enable an understanding of any actions and
initiatives through which the undertaking seeks to:
(a) to prevent, mitigate and remediate negative material impacts on its own workforce; and/or
(b) to achieve positive material impacts for its own workforce.
Secondly, it is to enable an understanding of the ways in which the undertaking is addressing the material risks and
pursuing the material opportunities related to its own workforce.
37. The undertaking shall provide a summarised description of the action plans and resources to manage its material
impacts, risks, and opportunities related to its own workforce in accordance with ESRS 2 MDR-A Actions and
resources in relation to material sustainability matters.
38. In relation to the material impacts related to its own workforce, the undertaking shall describe:
(a) actions taken, planned or underway to prevent or mitigate material negative impacts on its own workforce;
(b) whether and how it has taken action to provide or enable remedy in relation to an actual material impact;
(c) any additional actions or initiatives it has in place with the primary purpose of delivering positive impacts for its
own workforce; and
(94) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #5 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Lack
of grievance/complaints handling mechanisms related to employee matters).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 171/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(d) how it tracks and assesses the effectiveness of these actions and initiatives in delivering outcomes for its own
workforce.
39. In relation to paragraph 36, the undertaking shall describe the processes through which it identifies what action is
needed and appropriate in response to a particular actual or potential negative impact on its own workforce.
40. In relation to material risks and opportunities, the undertaking shall describe:
(a) what action is planned or underway to mitigate material risks for the undertaking arising from its impacts and
dependencies on its own workforce and how it tracks effectiveness in practice; and
(b) what action is planned or underway to pursue material opportunities for the undertaking in relation to its own
workforce.
41. The undertaking shall disclose whether and how it ensures that its own practices do not cause or contribute to
material negative impacts on own workforce, including, where relevant, its practices in relation to procurement,
sales and data use. This may include disclosing what approach is taken when tensions arise between the prevention
or mitigation of material negative impacts and other business pressures.
42. When disclosing the information required under paragraph 40, the undertaking shall consider ESRS 2 MDR-T
Tracking effectiveness of policies and actions through targets if it evaluates the effectiveness of an action by setting a target.
43. The undertaking shall disclose what resources are allocated to the management of its material impacts, with
information that allows users to gain an understanding of how the material impacts are managed.
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement S1-5 – Targets related to managing material negative impacts, advancing positive impacts, and
managing material risks and opportunities
44. The undertaking shall disclose the time-bound and outcome-oriented targets it may have set related to:
(a) reducing negative impacts on its own workforce; and/or
(b) advancing positive impacts on its own workforce; and/or
(c) managing material risks and opportunities related to its own workforce.
45. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the extent to which the undertaking is
using outcome-oriented targets to drive and measure its progress in addressing its material negative impacts and/or
advancing positive impacts on its own workforce, and/or in managing material risks and opportunities related to its
own workforce.
46. The summarised description of the targets set to manage its material impacts, risks and opportunities related to the
undertaking’s own workforce shall contain the information requirements defined in ESRS 2 MDR-T.
47. The undertaking shall disclose the process for setting the targets, including whether and how the undertaking
engaged directly with its own workforce or workers’ representatives in:
(a) setting any such targets;
(b) tracking the undertaking’s performance against them; and
(c) identifying any lessons or improvements as a result of the undertaking’s performance.
Disclosure Requirement S1-6 – Characteristics of the undertaking’s employees
48. The undertaking shall describe key characteristics of employees in its own workforce.
172/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
49. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide insight into the undertaking’s approach to employment,
including the scope and nature of impacts arising from its employment practices, to provide contextual information
that aids an understanding of the information reported in other disclosures, and to serve as the basis for calculation
for quantitative metrics to be disclosed under other disclosure requirements in this Standard.
50. In addition to the information required by paragraph 40(a)iii of ESRS 2 General Disclosures, the undertaking shall
disclose:
(a) the total number of employees by head count, and breakdowns by gender and by country for countries in which
the undertaking has 50 or more employees representing at least 10% of its total number of employees;
(b) the total number by head count or full time equivalent (FTE) of:
i. permanent employees, and breakdown by gender;
ii. temporary employees, and breakdown by gender; and
iii. non-guaranteed hours employees, and breakdown by gender.
(c) the total number of employees who have left the undertaking during the reporting period and the rate of
employee turnover in the reporting period.
(d) a description of the methodologies and assumptions used to compile the data, including whether the numbers
are reported:
i. in head count or full-time equivalent (FTE) (including an explanation of how FTE is defined); and
ii. at the end of the reporting period, as an average across the reporting period, or using another methodology.
(e) where applicable, a provision of contextual information necessary to understand the data (for example, to
understand fluctuations in number of employees during the reporting period); and
(f) a cross-reference of the information reported under (a) above to the most representative number in the financial
statements.
51. For the information specified in point (b) of paragraph 50, the undertaking may in addition disclose the breakdown
by region.
52. The undertaking may disclose by head count or full time equivalent (FTE) the following information:
(a) full-time employees, and breakdowns by gender and by region; and
(b) part-time employees, and breakdowns by gender and by region.
Disclosure Requirement S1-7 – Characteristics of non-employees in the undertaking’s own workforce
53. The undertaking shall describe key characteristics of non-employees in its own workforce.
54. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide insight into the undertaking’s approach to employment,
including the scope and nature of impacts arising from its employment practices, to provide contextual information
that aids the understanding of the information reported in other disclosures, and to serve as the basis for calculation
for quantitative metrics to be disclosed under other disclosure requirements in this Standard. It also allows an
understanding of how much the undertaking relies on non-employees as part of its workforce.
55. The disclosure required by paragraph 53 shall include:
(a) a disclosure of the total number of non-employees in the undertaking’s own workforce, i.e., either people with
contracts with the undertaking to supply labour (“self-employed people”) or people provided by undertakings
primarily engaged in “employment activities” (NACE Code N78).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 173/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) an explanation of the methodologies and assumptions used to compile the data, including whether the number
of non-employees is reported:
i. in headcount or full-time equivalent (FTE) (including a definition of how FTE is defined); and
ii. at the end of the reporting period, as an average across the reporting period, or using another methodology.
(c) where applicable, a provision of contextual information necessary to understand the data (for example,
significant fluctuations in the number of non-employees in the undertaking’s own workforce during the
reporting period and between the current and the previous reporting period).
56. For the information specified in point (a) of paragraph 55, the undertaking may disclose the most common types of
non-employees (for example, self-employed people, people provided by undertakings primarily engaged in
employment activities, and other types relevant to the undertaking), their relationship with the undertaking, and the
type of work that they perform.
57. Where data is not available, the undertaking shall estimate the number and state that it has done so. When the
undertaking performs estimates, it shall describe the basis of preparation of this estimation.
Disclosure Requirement S1-8 – Collective bargaining coverage and social dialogue
58. The undertaking shall disclose information on the extent to which the working conditions and terms of
employment of its employees are determined or influenced by collective bargaining agreements and on the
extent to which its employees are represented in social dialogue in the European Economic Area (EEA) at
the establishment and European level.
59. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the coverage of collective bargaining
agreements and social dialogue for the undertaking’s own employees.
60. The undertaking shall disclose:
(a) the percentage of its total employees covered by collective bargaining agreements;
(b) in the EEA, whether it has one or more collective bargaining agreements and, if so, the overall percentage of its
employees covered by such agreement(s) for each country in which it has significant employment, defined as at
least 50 employees by head count representing at least 10% of its total number of employees; and
(c) outside the EEA, the percentage of its own employees covered by collective bargaining agreements by region.
61. For employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements, the undertaking may disclose whether it determines
their working conditions and terms of employment based on collective bargaining agreements that cover its other
employees or based on collective bargaining agreements from other undertakings.
62. The undertaking may disclose the extent to which the working conditions and terms of employment of non-
employees in its own workforce are determined or influenced by collective bargaining agreements, including an
estimate of the coverage rate.
63. The undertaking shall disclose the following information in relation to social dialogue:
(a) the global percentage of employees covered by workers’ representatives, reported at the country level for each
EEA country in which the undertaking has significant employment; and
(b) the existence of any agreement with its employees for representation by a European Works Council (EWC), a
Societas Europaea (SE) Works Council, or a Societas Cooperativa Europaea (SCE) Works Council.
174/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Disclosure Requirement S1-9 – Diversity metrics
64. The undertaking shall disclose the gender distribution at top management and the age distribution amongst
its employees.
65. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of gender diversity at top management
level and the age distribution of its employees.
66. The undertaking shall disclose:
(a) the gender distribution in number and percentage at top management level; and
(b) the distribution of employees by age group: under 30 years old; 30-50 years old; over 50 years old.
Disclosure Requirement S1-10 – Adequate wages
67. The undertaking shall disclose whether or not its employees are paid an adequate wage, and if they are not
all paid an adequate wage, the countries and percentage of employees concerned.
68. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of whether or not all the undertaking’s
employees are paid an adequate wage, in line with applicable benchmarks.
69. The undertaking shall disclose whether all its employees are paid an adequate wage, in line with applicable
benchmarks. If so, stating this will be sufficient to fulfil this disclosure requirement and no further information is
needed.
70. If not all its employees are paid an adequate wage in line with applicable benchmarks, the undertaking shall disclose
the countries where employees earn below the applicable adequate wage benchmark and the percentage of employees
that earn below the applicable adequate wage benchmark for each of these countries.
71. The undertaking may also disclose the information specified in this disclosure requirement with regard to non-
employees in its workforce.
Disclosure Requirement S1-11 – Social protection
72. The undertaking shall disclose whether its employees are covered by social protection against loss of
income due to major life events, and, if not, the countries where this is not the case.
73. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of whether the undertaking’s employees
are covered by social protection against loss of income due to major life events, and, if not, the countries where this
is not the case.
74. The undertaking shall disclose whether all its employees are covered by social protection, through public programs
or through benefits offered by the undertaking, against loss of income due to any of the following major life events:
(a) sickness;
(b) unemployment starting from when the own worker is working for the undertaking;
(c) employment injury and acquired disability;
(d) parental leave; and
(e) retirement.
If so, stating this is sufficient to fulfil this disclosure requirement and no further information is needed.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 175/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
75. If not all of its employees are covered by social protection in accordance with paragraph 72, the undertaking shall in
addition disclose the countries where employees do not have social protection with regard to one or more of the
types of events listed in paragraph 72 and for each of those countries the types of employees who do not have social
protection with regard to each applicable major life event.
76. The undertaking may also disclose the information specified in this disclosure requirement with regard to non-
employees in its workforce.
Disclosure Requirement S1-12– Persons with disabilities
77. The undertaking shall disclose the percentage of its own employees with disabilities.
78. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the extent to which persons with
disabilities are included among the undertaking’s employees.
79. The undertaking shall disclose the percentage of persons with disabilities amongst its employees subject to legal
restrictions on the collection of data.
80. The undertaking may disclose the percentage of employees with disabilities with a breakdown by gender.
Disclosure Requirement S1-13 – Training and skills development metrics
81. The undertaking shall disclose the extent to which training and skills development is provided to its
employees.
82. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the training and skills development
-related activities that have been offered to employees, within the context of continuous professional growth, to
upgrade employees’ skills and facilitate continued employability.
83. The disclosure required by paragraph 81 shall include:
(a) the percentage of employees that participated in regular performance and career development reviews; such
information shall be broken down by gender;
(b) the average number of training hours per employee and by gender.
84. The undertaking may disclose breakdowns by employee category for the percentage of employees that participated in
regular performance and career development and for the average number of training hours per employee.
85. The undertaking may also disclose the information specified in this disclosure requirement with regard to non-
employees in its workforce.
Disclosure Requirement S1-14 – Health and safety metrics
86. The undertaking shall disclose information on the extent to which its own workforce is covered by its
health and safety management system and the number of incidents associated with work-related injuries, ill
health and fatalities of its own workforce. In addition, it shall disclose the number of fatalities as a result of
work-related injuries and work-related ill health of other workers working on the undertaking’s sites.
87. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to allow an understanding of the coverage, quality and performance
of the health and safety management system established to prevent work-related injuries.
88. The disclosure required by paragraph 86 shall include the following information, where applicable broken down
between employees and non-employees in the undertaking’s own workforce:
(a) the percentage of people in its own workforce who are covered by the undertaking’s health and safety
management system based on legal requirements and/or recognised standards or guidelines;
176/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) the number of fatalities(95)as a result of work-related injuries and work-related ill health;
(c) the number and rate of recordable work-related accidents;
(d) with regard to the undertaking’s employees, the number of cases of recordable work-related ill health, subject to
legal restrictions on the collection of data; and
(e) with regard to the undertaking’s employees, the number of days lost to work-related injuries and fatalities from
work-related accidents, work-related ill health and fatalities from ill health(96).
The information for (b) shall also be reported for other workers working on the undertaking’s sites, such as value
chain workers if they are working on the undertaking’s sites.
89. The undertaking may also disclose the information specified in points (d) and (e) of paragraph 88 with regard to non-
employees.
90. In addition, the undertaking may include the following additional information on the health and safety coverage: the
percentage of its own workers covered by a health and safety management system which is based on legal
requirements and/or recognised standards or guidelines and which has been internally audited and/or audited or
certified by an external party.
Disclosure Requirement S1-15 – Work-life balance metrics
91. The undertaking shall disclose the extent to which employees are entitled to and make use of family-related
leave.
92. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of the entitlement and actual practices
amongst the employees to take family-related leave in a gender equitable manner, as it is one of the dimensions of
work-life balance.
93. The disclosure required by paragraph 91 shall include:
(a) the percentage of employees entitled to take family-related leave; and
(b) the percentage of entitled employees that took family-related leave, and a breakdown by gender.
94. If all of the undertaking’s employees are entitled to family-related leave through social policy and/or collective
bargaining agreements, it is sufficient to disclose this in order to meet the requirement of paragraph 93a.
Disclosure Requirement S1-16 – Remuneration metrics (pay gap and total remuneration)
95. The undertaking shall disclose the percentage gap in pay between its female and male employees and the
ratio between the remuneration of its highest paid individual and the median remuneration for its
employees.
96. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is twofold: to allow an understanding of the extent of any gap in the pay
between women and men amongst the undertaking’s employees; and to provide insight into the level of
remuneration inequality inside the undertaking and whether wide pay disparities exist.
(95) This information supports the information needs of benchmark administrators to disclose ESG factors subject to Regulation
(EU) 2020/1816 as set out by indicator “Weighted average ratio of accidents, injuries, fatalities” in section 1 and 2 of Annex II. This
information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #2 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Rate of accidents”)
and benchmark administrators to disclose ESG factors subject to Regulation (EU) 2020/1816 as set out by indicator “Weighted
average ratio of accidents, injuries, fatalities” in section 1 and 2 of Annex II.
(96) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #3 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Number of days lost
to injuries, accidents, fatalities or illness”).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 177/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
97. The disclosure required by paragraph 95 shall include:
(a) the gender pay gap, defined as the difference of average pay levels between female and male employees, expressed
as percentage of the average pay level of male employees(97);
(b) the annual total remuneration ratio of the highest paid individual to the median annual total remuneration for
all employees (excluding the highest-paid individual)(98); and
(c) where applicable, any contextual information necessary to understand the data and how the data has been
compiled and other changes to the underlying data that are to be considered.
98. The undertaking may disclose a breakdown of the gender pay gap as defined in paragraph 97(a) by employee
category and/or by country/segment. The undertaking may also disclose the gender pay gap between employees by
categories of employees broken down by ordinary basic salary and complementary or variable components.
99. In relation to paragraph 97 (b), the undertaking may report this figure adjusted for purchasing power differences
between countries, in which case it shall report the methodology used for the calculation.
Disclosure Requirement S1-17 – Incidents, complaints and severe human rights impacts
100. The undertaking shall disclose the number of work-related incidents and/or complaints and severe human
rights impacts within its own workforce, and any related material fines, sanctions or compensation for the
reporting period.
101. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to allow an understanding of the extent to which work-related
incidents and severe cases of human rights impacts are affecting its own workforce.
102. The disclosure required by paragraph 100 shall include, subject to the relevant privacy regulations, work-related
incidents of discrimination on the grounds of gender, racial or ethnic origin, nationality, religion or belief, disability,
age, sexual orientation, or other relevant forms of discrimination involving internal and/or external stakeholders
across operations in the reporting period. This includes incidents of harassment as a specific form of discrimination.
103. The undertaking shall disclose:
(a) the total number of incidents of discrimination, including harassment, reported in the reporting period(99);
(b) the number of complaints filed through channels for people in the undertaking’s own workforce to raise
concerns (including grievance mechanisms) and, where applicable, to the National Contact Points for OECD
Multinational Enterprises related to the matters defined in paragraph 2 of this Standard, excluding those already
reported in (a) above;
(97) This information supports the information needs of: financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from a mandatory indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #12 in Table I of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Unadjusted gender
pay gap”); and benchmark administrators to disclose ESG factors subject to Regulation (EU) 2020/1816 as set out by indicator
“Weighted average gender pay gap” in section 1 and 2 of Annex II.
(98) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #8 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Excessive CEO pay
ratio”).
(99) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #7 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Incidents of
discrimination”).
178/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(c) the total amount of fines, penalties, and compensation for damages as a result of the incidents and complaints
disclosed above, and a reconciliation of such monetary amounts disclosed with the most relevant amount
presented in the financial statements; and
(d) where applicable, contextual information necessary to understand the data and how such data has been
compiled.
104. The undertaking shall disclose the following information regarding identified cases of severe human rights incidents
(e.g., forced labour, human trafficking or child labour):
(a) the number of severe human rights incidents connected to the undertaking’s workforce in the reporting period,
including an indication of how many of these are cases of non-respect of the UN Guiding Principles on Business
and Human Rights, ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work or OECD Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises. If no such incidents have occurred, the undertaking shall state this(100); and
(b) the total amount of fines, penalties and compensation for damages for the incidents described in (a) above, and a
reconciliation of the monetary amounts disclosed in the most relevant amount in the financial statements.
(100) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from a mandatory and additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #10 in Table I of
Annex I and by indicator #14 in Table III of Annex I of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure
rules on sustainable investments (“Violations of UNGC principles and OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises” and “Number
of identified cases of severe human rights issues and incidents”); and the information needs of benchmark administrators to disclose
ESG factors subject to Regulation (EU) 2020/1816 as set out by indicator “Number of benchmark constituents subject to social
violations (absolute number and relative divided by all benchmark constituents), as referred to in international treaties and
conventions, United Nations principles and, where applicable, national law” in section 1 and 2 of Annex II.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 179/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix A
Application Requirements
This appendix is an integral part of the ESRS S1 Own workforce. It supports the application of the disclosure requirements set
out in this standard and has the same authority as the other parts of this Standard.
Objective
AR 1. In addition to the issues listed in paragraph 2, the undertaking may also consider disclosing information about
other issues relevant to a material impact for a shorter period of time, for instance initiatives regarding the
health and safety of its own workforce during a pandemic.
AR 2. The overview of social matters provided in paragraph 2 is not meant to imply that all of these issues should be
reported on in each Disclosure Requirement in this Standard. Rather, they provide a list of matters derived from
the sustainability reporting requirements set out in Directive 2013/34/EU that the undertaking shall consider for
the ESRS 2 materiality assessment related to its own workforce and, as appropriate, report as material impacts,
risks and opportunities within the scope of this Standard.
AR 3. Examples of people that fall within the scope of “Own workforce” are:
(a) Examples of contractors (self-employed persons) in the undertaking’s own workforce include:
i. Contractors hired by the undertaking to perform work that would otherwise be carried out by an
employee
ii. Contractors hired by the undertaking to perform work in a public area (e.g., on a road, on the street).
iii. Contractors hired by the undertaking to deliver the work/service directly at the workplace of a client of
the undertaking.
(b) Examples of people employed by a third party engaged in ‘employment activities’ include people who
perform the same work that employees carry out, such as:
i. people who fill in for employees who are temporarily absent (due to illness, holiday, parental leave, etc.);
ii. people performing work additional to regular employees;
iii. people who are dispatched temporarily from another EU member state to work for the undertaking
(‘posted workers’).
ESRS 2 General Disclosures
Strategy
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-2 – Interests and views of stakeholders
AR 4. ESRS 2 SBM-2 requires the undertaking to provide an understanding of whether and how it considers the role
that its strategy and business model may play in creating, exacerbating or mitigating significant material impacts
on its own workforce, and whether and how the business model and strategy are adapted to address such material
impacts.
AR 5. While the undertaking’s own workforce may not be engaging with the undertaking at the level of its strategy or
business model, their views can inform the undertaking’s assessment of its strategy and business model. The
undertaking shall consider the views of workers’ representatives when applicable to fulfil this disclosure.
180/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 – Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction
with strategy and business model
AR 6. Impacts on the undertaking’s own workforce can originate in its strategy or business model in a number of
different ways. For example, impacts may relate to the undertaking’s value proposition (such as providing lowest
cost products or services, or high-speed delivery, in ways that put pressure on labour rights in its own
operations), or its cost structure and the revenue model (such as shifting inventory risk to suppliers, with
knock-on effects on the labour rights of people who work for them).
AR 7. Impacts on the undertaking’s own workforce that originate in the strategy or business model can also bring
material risks to the undertaking. For example, risks arise if some people in the workforce are at risk of forced
labour, and the undertaking is importing products into countries where the law allows for the confiscation of
imported goods that are suspected of being made with forced labour. An example of opportunities for the
undertaking may result from providing opportunities for the workforce such as job creation and upskilling in
the context of a “just transition”. Another example, in the context of a pandemic or other severe health crisis,
relates to the undertaking potentially relying on contingent labour with little to no access to sick care and health
benefits that may face severe operational and business continuity risks as workers have no choice but to keep
working while sick, further exacerbating the spread of the disease and causing major supply chain breakdowns.
Reputational and business opportunity risks linked to the exploitation of low-skilled, low-paid workers in
sourcing geographies with minimal protections for them are also increasing with media backlash and consumer
preferences moving to more ethically sourced or sustainable goods.
AR 8. Examples of particular characteristics of people in the undertaking’s own workforce that may be considered by
the undertaking when responding to paragraph 15 relate to young people that may be more susceptible to
impacts on their physical and mental development, or women in a context where women are routinely
discriminated against in the terms and conditions of work, or migrants in a context where the market for the
supply of labour is poorly regulated and workers are routinely charged recruitment fees. For some people in the
workforce, the inherent nature of the activity that they are required to undertake may put them at risk (for
example, people required to handle chemicals or operate certain equipment or low paid employees who are on
“zero hours” contracts).
AR 9. With regard to paragraph 16, material risks could also arise because of the undertaking’s dependency on its own
workforce where low-likelihood but high-impact events may trigger financial effects; for example, where a global
pandemic leads to severe health impacts on the undertaking’s workforce resulting in major disruptions to
production and distribution. Other examples of risk related to the undertaking’s dependency on its workforce
include a shortage in skilled workers or political decisions or legislation affecting its own operations and own
workforce.
Impacts, risks and opportunities management
Disclosure Requirement S1-1 – Policies related to own workforce
AR 10. The undertaking shall consider whether explanations of significant changes to the policies adopted during the
reporting year (for example, new expectations for foreign subsidiaries, new or additional approaches to due
diligence and remedy) provide contextual information for users and may disclose such explanations. This
includes policies and commitments of the undertaking to prevent or mitigate the risks and negative impacts on
people in its own workforce of reducing carbon emissions and transitioning to greener and climate-neutral
operations as well as to provide opportunities for the workforce such as job creation and upskilling, including
explicit commitments to a ‘just transition’.
AR 11. The policy may take the form of a stand-alone policy regarding the undertaking’s own workforce or be included
in a broader document such as a code of ethics or a general sustainability policy that has already been disclosed
by the undertaking as part of another ESRS. In those cases, the undertaking shall provide an accurate cross-
reference to identify the aspects of the policy that satisfy the requirements of this Disclosure Requirement.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 181/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 12. When disclosing the alignment of its policies with the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, the
undertaking shall consider that the Guiding Principles refer to the International Bill of Human Rights, which
consist of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the two Covenants that implement it, as well as the
International Labour Organisation’s Declaration on Fundamental Rights and Principles at Work and the core
conventions that underpin it, and may report on alignment with these instruments.
AR 13. When explaining how external-facing policies are embedded, the undertaking may, for example, consider internal
policies of responsible sourcing, and alignment with other policies relevant to own workers, for example,
regarding forced labour. With regard to supplier codes of conduct that the undertaking may have, it shall
indicate whether they include provisions addressing the safety of workers, precarious work (i.e., use of workers
on short-term or limited hours contracts, workers employed via third parties, sub-contracting to third parties or
use of informal workers), human trafficking, the use of forced labour or child labour, and whether such
provisions are fully in line with applicable ILO standards.
AR 14. The undertaking may provide an illustration of the types of communication of its policies to those individuals,
group of individuals or entities for whom they are relevant, either because they are expected to implement them
(for example, the undertaking’s employees, contractors and suppliers), or because they have a direct interest in
their implementation (for example, people in its own workforce, investors). It may disclose communication tools
and channels (for example, flyers, newsletters, dedicated websites, social media, face to face interactions, workers’
representatives), aimed at ensuring that the policy is accessible and that different audiences understand its
implications. The undertaking may also explain how it identifies and removes potential barriers for
dissemination, such as through translation into relevant languages or the use of graphic depictions.
AR 15. Discrimination in employment and occupation occurs when someone is treated differently or less favourably
because of characteristics that are not related to merit or the inherent requirements of the job. These
characteristics are commonly defined in national laws. Besides the grounds mentioned in the Disclosure
Requirement, the undertaking shall consider other grounds for discrimination prohibited under national
legislation.
AR 16. Discrimination can arise in a variety of work-related activities. These include access to employment, particular
occupations, training and vocational guidance and social security. Moreover, it can occur with respect to the
terms and conditions of employment, such as: recruitment, remuneration, hours of work and rest, paid holidays,
maternity protection, security of tenure, job assignments, performance assessment and advancement, training
opportunities, promotion prospects, occupational safety and health, termination of employment. The
undertaking may address these areas specifically when disclosing its policies and underlying procedures to fulfil
the disclosure requirement.
AR 17. The undertaking may disclose whether it:
(a) has policies and procedures which make qualifications, skills and experience the basis for the recruitment,
placement, training and advancement at all levels, while accounting for the fact that some individuals may
have more difficulty than others to acquire such qualifications, skills and experience;
(b) assigns responsibility at top management level for equal treatment and opportunities in employment, issue
clear company-wide policies and procedures to guide equal employment practices, and link advancement to
desired performance in this area;
(c) provides staff training on non-discrimination policies and practices, with a particular focus on middle and
upper management to raise awareness and address resolution strategies for preventing and addressing
systemic and incidental discrimination;
(d) makes adjustments to the physical environment to ensure health and safety for workers, customers and other
visitors with disabilities;
(e) evaluates whether job requirements have been defined in a way that could systematically disadvantage certain
groups;
182/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(f) keeps up-to-date records on recruitment, training and promotion that provide a transparent view of
opportunities for employees and their progression within the undertaking;
(g) puts in place grievance procedures to address complaints, handle appeals and provide recourse for employees
(especially in the context of negotiations and collective agreements) when discrimination is identified, and is
alert to formal structures and informal cultural issues that can prevent employees from raising concerns and
grievances; and
(h) has programs to promote access to skills development.
Disclosure Requirement S1-2 – Processes for engaging with own workforce and workers' representatives about impacts
AR 18. When describing what function or role has operational responsibility for such engagement and/or ultimate
accountability, the undertaking may disclose whether this is a dedicated role or function or part of a broader role
or function, and whether any capacity building activities have been offered to support the staff to undertake
engagement. If it cannot identify such a position or function, it may state that this is the case. This disclosure
could also be fulfilled by making reference to information disclosed according to ESRS 2 GOV-1 The role of the
administrative, management and supervisory bodies.
AR 19. When preparing the disclosures described in paragraph 27 b) and c), the following illustrations may be
considered:
(a) examples of stages at which engagement occurs are i) determining the approach to mitigation and ii)
evaluating the effectiveness of mitigation;
(b) for type of engagement, these could be participation, consultation and/or information;
(c) for the frequency of the engagement, information may be provided on whether engagement occurs on a
regular basis, at certain points in a project or business process, (for example, when a new harvest season
begins or a new production line is opened), as well as whether it occurs in response to legal
requirements and/or in response to stakeholder requests and whether the result of the engagement is being
integrated into the undertaking's decision-making processes; and
(d) for the role with operational responsibility, whether the undertaking requires relevant staff to have certain
skills, or whether it provides training or capacity building to relevant staff to undertake engagement.
AR 20. Global Framework Agreements (GFA) serve to establish an ongoing relationship between a multinational
enterprise and a Global Union Federation to ensure that the undertaking adheres to the same standards in every
country in which it operates.
AR 21. To illustrate how the perspectives of its own workforce have informed specific decisions or activities, the
undertaking may provide examples from the current reporting period.
AR 22. Where the undertaking has agreements with national, European or international trade unions or works councils
related to the rights of people its own workforce, this can be disclosed to illustrate how the agreement enables
the undertaking to gain insight into the perspectives of such people.
AR 23. Where possible, the undertaking may disclose examples from the reporting period to illustrate how the
perspectives of its own workforce and workers' representatives have informed specific decisions or activities of
the undertaking.
AR 24. The undertaking shall consider the following aspects when fulfilling this Disclosure Requirement:
(a) The type of engagement (for example, information, consultation or participation) and its frequency (for
example, ongoing, quarterly, annually);
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 183/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) how feedback is recorded and integrated into decision-making, and how people in the workforce are
informed about the way in which their feedback has influenced decisions;
(c) whether engagement activities take place at the organisational level or at a lower level, such as at the site or
project level, and in the latter case, how information from engagement activities is centralised;
(d) the resources (for example, financial or human resources) allocated to engagement; and
(e) how it engages with people in its workforce and workers’ representatives on the impacts on its own
workforce that may arise from reducing carbon emissions and transitioning to greener and climate-neutral
operations, in particular restructuring, employment loss or creation, training and up/reskilling, gender and
social equity, and health and safety.
AR 25. The undertaking may also disclose the following information in relation to paragraph 24 on diversity:
(a) how it engages with at-risk or persons in vulnerable situations (for example whether it takes specific
approaches and gives special attention to potential barriers);
(b) how it takes into account potential barriers to engagement with people in its workforce (for example,
language and cultural differences, gender and power imbalances, divisions within a community or group);
(c) how it provides people in its workforce with information that is understandable and accessible through
appropriate communication channels;
(d) any conflicting interests that have arisen among its workforce and how the undertaking has resolved these
conflicting interests; and
(e) how it seeks to respect the human rights of all stakeholders engaged, for example, their rights to privacy,
freedom of expression, and peaceful assembly and protest.
AR 26. The undertaking may also report information about the effectiveness of processes for engaging with its own
workforce from previous reporting periods. This applies in cases where the undertaking has assessed the
effectiveness of these processes or derived lessons during the current reporting period. Processes used to track
effectiveness can include internal or external auditing or verification, impact assessments, measurement systems,
stakeholder feedback, grievance mechanisms, external performance ratings, and benchmarking.
Disclosure Requirement S1-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for own workers to raise concerns
AR 27. In fulfilling the requirements set out by the disclosure criteria of Disclosure Requirement ESRS S1-3, the
undertaking may be guided by the content of the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights and the
OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Business Conduct focused on remediation and grievance
mechanisms.
AR 28. Channels for raising concerns or needs include grievance mechanisms, hotlines, trade unions (where people in
the workforce are unionised), works councils, dialogue processes or other means through which the
undertaking’s own workforce or workers’ representatives can raise concerns about impacts or explain needs
that they would like the undertaking to address. This could include both channels provided by the undertaking
directly and channels provided by the entities where their own workforce is working, in addition to any other
mechanisms an undertaking may use to gain insight into the management of impacts on its own workforce,
such as compliance audits. Where the undertaking is relying solely on information about the existence of such
channels provided by its business relationships to answer this requirement, it may state that.
184/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 29. Third party mechanisms could include those operated by the government, NGOs, industry associations and other
collaborative initiatives. The undertaking may disclose whether these are accessible to all of its own workforce (or
workers’ representatives or, in their absence, individuals or organisations acting on their behalf or who are
otherwise in a position to be aware of negative impacts).
AR 30. The undertaking shall consider whether and how people in its own workforce that may be affected and their
workers' representatives are able to access channels at the level of the undertaking they are employed by, or
contracted to work for, in relation to each material impact. Relevant channels may include hotlines, trade unions
(where people in the workforce are unionised) or works councils, or other grievance mechanisms operated by the
relevant undertaking or by a third party.
AR 31. In explaining whether and how the undertaking knows that people in its own workforce are aware of and trust
any of these channels, the undertaking may provide relevant and reliable data about the effectiveness of these
channels from the perspective of the people concerned. Examples of sources of information are surveys of
people in the undertaking’s workforce that have used such channels and their levels of satisfaction with the
process and outcomes.
AR 32. In describing the effectiveness of channels for its own workforce and workers’ representatives to raise concerns,
the undertaking may be guided by the following questions, based on the “effectiveness criteria for non-judicial
grievance mechanisms”, as laid out in the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, in particular
principle 31. The considerations below may be applied to individual channels or to a collective system of
channels:
(a) do the channels have legitimacy by providing appropriate accountability for their fair conduct and building
stakeholder trust?
(b) are the channels known and accessible to stakeholders?
(c) do the channels have clear and known procedures, with indicative timeframes?
(d) do the channels ensure reasonable access for stakeholders to sources of information, advice and expertise?
(e) do the channels offer transparency by providing sufficient information both to complainants and, where
applicable, to meet any public interest?
(f) do outcomes achieved through the channels accord with internationally recognised human rights?
(g) does the undertaking identify insights from the channels that support continuous learning in both improving
the channels and preventing future impacts?
(h) does the undertaking focus on dialogue with complainants as the means to reach agreed solutions, rather
than seeking to unilaterally determine the outcome?
Disclosure Requirement S1-4 – Taking action on material impacts and approaches to mitigating material risks and
pursuing material opportunities related to own workforce, and effectiveness of those actions and approaches
AR 33. It may take time to understand negative impacts and how the undertaking may be involved with them through its
own workforce, as well as to identify appropriate responses and put them into practice). Therefore, the
undertaking may disclose:
(a) its general and specific approaches to addressing material negative impacts;
(b) its initiatives aimed at contributing to additional material positive impacts;
(c) how far it has progressed in its efforts during the reporting period; and
(d) its aims for continued improvement.
AR 34. Appropriate action can vary according to whether the undertaking causes or contributes to a material impact, or
whether it is involved because the impact is directly linked to its operations, products or services by a business
relationship.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 185/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 35. Given that material negative impacts affecting its own workforce that have occurred during the reporting period
may also be connected with other entities or operations outside its direct control, the undertaking may disclose
whether and how it seeks to use its leverage in its business relationships to manage those impacts. This may
include using commercial leverage (for example, enforcing contractual requirements with business relationships
or implementing incentives), other forms of leverage within the relationship (such as providing training or
capacity-building on workers’ rights to entities with which the undertaking has a business relationship) or
collaborative leverage with peers or other actors (such as initiatives aimed at responsible recruitment or ensuring
workers receive an adequate wage).
AR 36. When the undertaking discloses its participation in an industry or multi-stakeholder initiative as part of its
actions to address material negative impacts, the undertaking may disclose how the initiative, and its own
involvement, is aiming to address the material impact concerned. It may report under ESRS S1-5 the relevant
targets set by the initiative and progress towards them.
AR 37. When disclosing whether and how the undertaking considers actual and potential impacts on its own workforce
in decisions to terminate business relationships and whether and how it seeks to address any negative impacts
that may result from termination, the undertaking may include examples.
AR 38. Processes used to track the effectiveness of actions can include internal or external auditing or verification, court
proceedings and/or related court decisions, impact assessments, measurement systems, stakeholder feedback,
grievance mechanisms, external performance ratings, and benchmarking.
AR 39. Reporting on effectiveness is aimed at enabling the understanding of the links between actions taken by an
undertaking and the effective management of impacts. Additional information that the undertaking may provide
includes data showing a decrease in the number of incidents identified.
AR 40. With regard to initiatives or processes whose primary aim is to deliver positive impacts for people in the
undertaking’s own workforce that are based on their needs, and with regard to progress in the implementation
of such initiatives or processes, the undertaking may disclose:
(a) information about whether and how people in its own workforce and workers’ representatives play a role in
decisions regarding the design and implementation of these programmes or processes; and
(b) information about the intended or achieved positive outcomes for the undertaking’s own workforce of these
programmes or processes.
AR 41. The undertaking may explain whether any such initiatives are designed also to support the achievement of one or
more Sustainable Development Goals. For example, an undertaking committing to SDG 8 to “promote sustained,
inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all” may be
actively working towards eliminating forced labour or compulsory labour or supporting higher levels of
productivity on activities in developing countries through technological upgrades and training of local labour,
which can benefit both the specific people in its own workforce targeted by the actions, and also their local
communities.
AR 42. When disclosing the intended or achieved positive outcomes of its actions for the undertaking’s own workforce, a
distinction is to be made between evidence of certain activities having occurred (for example, that x number of
people have received financial literacy training) from evidence of actual outcomes for the people concerned (for
example, that x people report that they are able to better manage their pay and their household budgets).
AR 43. If the undertaking has taken measures to mitigate negative impacts on its own workforce that arise from the
transition to a greener, climate-neutral economy, such as training and reskilling, employment guarantees, and in
the case of downscaling or mass dismissal, measures such as job counselling, coaching, intra-company
placements and early retirement plans, the undertaking shall disclose those measures. This includes measures to
186/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
comply with prevailing regulation. The undertaking may highlight present and/or expected external
developments that influence whether dependencies turn into risks. This includes consideration of impacts that
may arise from the transition to greener and climate-neutral operations.
AR 44. When disclosing the material risks and opportunities related to its impacts or dependencies on its own
workforce, the undertaking may consider the following:
(a) risks related to the undertaking’s impacts on its own workforce may include the reputational or legal
exposure where people in the undertaking’s workforce are found to be subject to forced labour or child
labour;
(b) risks related to the undertaking’s dependencies on its own workforce may include disruption of business
operations where significant employee turnover or lack of skills/training development threaten the
undertaking’s business; and
(c) opportunities related to the undertaking’s impacts on its own workforce may include market differentiation
and greater customer appeal from guaranteeing decent pay and conditions for non-employees.
AR 45. When explaining whether dependencies turn into risks, the undertaking shall consider external developments.
AR 46. When disclosing policies, actions and resources and targets related to the management of material risks and
opportunities, in cases where risks and opportunities arise from a material impact, the undertaking may cross-
reference its disclosures on policies, actions and resources and targets in relation to that impact.
AR 47. The undertaking shall consider whether and how its process(es) to manage material risks related to own
workforce are integrated into its existing risk management process(es).
AR 48. When disclosing the resources allocated to the management of material impacts, the undertaking may explain
which internal functions are involved in managing the impacts and what types of action they take to address
negative and advance positive impacts.
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement S1-5 – Targets related to managing material impacts, advancing positive impacts, as well as to
risks and opportunities
AR 49. When disclosing information about targets in accordance with paragraph 46, the undertaking may disclose:
(a) the intended outcomes to be achieved in the lives of a certain number of people in its own workforce;
(b) the stability of the targets over time in terms of definitions and methodologies to enable comparability over
time; and/or
(c) the standards or commitments which the targets are based on (for instance codes of conduct, sourcing
policies, global frameworks, or industry codes).
AR 50. Targets related to risks and opportunities may be the same as or distinct from targets related to impacts. For
example, a target to reach adequate wages for non-employees could both reduce impacts on those people and
reduce associated risks in terms of the quality and reliability of their output.
AR 51. The undertaking may also distinguish between short-, medium- and long-term targets covering the same policy
commitment. For example, the undertaking may have a long-term target to achieve an 80% reduction in health
and safety incidents affecting its delivery drivers by 2030 and a near-term target to reduce the overtime hours of
delivery drivers by x% while maintaining their income by 2024.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 187/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 52. When modifying or replacing a target in the reporting period, the undertaking may explain the change by cross-
referencing it to significant changes in the business model or to broader changes in the accepted standard or
legislation from which the target is derived to provide contextual information as per ESRS 2 BP-2 Disclosures in
relation to specific circumstances.
Disclosure Requirement S1-6 – Characteristics of the Undertaking’s Employees
AR 53. This Disclosure Requirement covers all employees who perform work for any of the undertaking’s entities
included in its sustainability reporting.
AR 54. Providing a breakdown of employees by country gives insight into the distribution of activity across countries.
The number of employees in each country is also a key trigger for many information, consultation and
participation rights for workers and workers' representatives, both in the Union labour law acquis (for example,
Directive 2009/38/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council(101)“European Works Councils Directive”
and Directive 2002/14/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council(102) “Information and Consultation
Directive”) and in national law (for example, rights to establish a works council or to have board level employee
representation). Providing a breakdown of employees by gender and type of employment relationship gives
insight into gender representation across the undertaking. Additionally, providing a breakdown of employees by
region gives insight into regional variations. A region can refer to a country or other geographic locations, such
as a region within a country or a world region.
AR 55. The undertaking shall disclose the requested disclosures in the following tabular formats:
Table 1
Template for presenting information on employee head count by gender
Gender Number of employees (head count)
Male
Female
Other
Not reported
Total
Employees
In some Member States it is possible for persons to legally register themselves as having a third, often neutral, gender, which
is categorised as “other” in the table above. However, if the undertaking is disclosing data about employees where this is not
possible, it may explain this and indicate that the “other” category is not applicable.
Table 2
Template for presenting employee head count in countries where the undertaking has at least 50 employees
representing at least 10% of its total number of employees.
Country Number of employees (head count)
Country A
Country B
(101) Directive 2009/38/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 May 2009 on the establishment of a European Works
Council or a procedure in Community-scale undertakings and Community-scale groups of undertakings for the purposes of
informing and consulting employees (OJ L 122, 16.5.2009, p. 28).
(102) Directive 2002/14/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2002 establishing a general framework for
informing and consulting employees in the European Community - Joint declaration of the European Parliament, the Council and
the Commission on employee representation (OJ L 80, 23.3.2002, p. 29).
188/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Country C
Country D
Table 3
Template for presenting information on employees by contract type, broken down by gender (head count or FTE)
(reporting on full-time and part-time employees is voluntary)
[Reporting period]
FEMALE MALE OTHER(*) NOT DISCLOSED TOTAL
Number of employees (head count / FTE)
Number of permanent employees (head count / FTE)
Number of temporary employees (head count / FTE)
Number of non-guaranteed hours employees (head count / FTE)
Number of full-time employees (head count / FTE)
Number of part-time employees (head count / FTE)
(*) Gender as specified by the employees themselves.
Table 4
Template for presenting information on employees by contract type, broken down by region (head count or FTE)
(reporting on full-time and part-time employees is voluntary)
[Reporting period]
REGION A REGION B TOTAL
Number of employees (head count / FTE)
Number of permanent employees (head count / FTE)
Number of temporary employees (head count / FTE)
Number of non-guaranteed hours employees (head count / FTE)
Number of full-time employees (head count / FTE)
Number of part-time employees (head count / FTE)
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 189/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 56. The definitions of permanent, temporary, non-guaranteed hours, full-time, and part-time employees differ
between countries. If the undertaking has employees in more than one country, it shall use the definitions as per
the national laws of the countries where the employees are based to calculate country-level data. The country-
level data shall then be added up to calculate total numbers, disregarding differences in national legal definitions.
Non-guaranteed hours employees are employed by the undertaking without a guarantee of a minimum or fixed
number of working hours. The employee may need to make themselves available for work as required, but the
undertaking is not contractually obliged to offer the employee a minimum or fixed number of working hours
per day, week, or month. Casual employees, employees with zero-hour contracts, and on-call employees are
examples that fall under this category.
AR 57. Disclosing the number of employees at the end of the reporting period provides information for that point in
time, without capturing fluctuations during the reporting period. Disclosing these numbers in averages across
the reporting period takes into account fluctuations during the reporting period.
AR 58. Quantitative data, such as the number of temporary or part-time employees, is unlikely to be sufficient on its
own. For example, a high proportion of temporary or part-time employees could indicate a lack of employment
security for employees, but it could equally signal workplace flexibility when offered as a voluntary choice. For
this reason, the undertaking is required to disclose contextual information to help information users interpret
the data. The undertaking can explain the reasons for temporary employment. An example of such a reason is
the recruitment of employees to undertake work on a temporary or seasonal project or event. Another example
is the standard practice of offering a temporary contract (for example, six months) to new employees before an
offer of permanent employment is made. The undertaking may also explain the reasons for non-guaranteed
hours employment.
AR 59. For the own employee turnover calculation, the undertaking shall calculate the aggregate of the number of
employees who leave voluntarily or due to dismissal, retirement, or death in service. The undertaking shall use
this number for the numerator of the employee turnover rate and may determine the denominator used to
calculate this rate and describe its methodology.
AR 60. Where data is not available for detailed information, the undertaking shall use an estimation of the employee
number or ratios, in accordance with ESRS 1, and clearly identify where the use of estimates has taken place.
Disclosure Requirement S1-7 – Characteristics of non-employees in the undertaking’s own workforce
AR 61. This Disclosure Requirement provides insight into the undertaking’s approach to employment, as well as the
scope and nature of impacts arising from its employment practices. It also provides contextual information that
aids an understanding of the information reported in other disclosures. This disclosure covers both individual
contractors supplying labour to the undertaking (“self-employed people”) and workers provided by undertakings
primarily engaged in “employment activities” (NACE Code N78). If all the people performing work for the
undertaking are employees and the undertaking does not have any people in its workforce who are not
employees, this Disclosure Requirement is not material for the undertaking; notwithstanding, the undertaking
may state this fact when disclosing the information required by Disclosure Requirement S1-6 as contextual
information as this information can be relevant for the users of the Sustainability Statement.
AR 62. Examples of contractors (self-employed people) in the undertaking’s own workforce include: contractors hired by
the undertaking to perform work that would otherwise be carried out by an employee; contractors hired by the
undertaking to perform work in a public area (for example, on a road, on the street); and contractors hired by
the undertaking to deliver the work/service directly at the workplace of a client of the organization. Examples of
people employed by a third party engaged in ‘employment activities’ whose work is under the direction of the
undertaking include: people who perform the same work that employees carry out, such as people who fill in for
employees who are temporarily absent (due to illness, holiday, parental leave, etc.); people performing regular
work at the same site as employees; and workers who are dispatched temporarily from another EU member state
to work for the undertaking (‘posted workers’). Examples of value chain workers (and thus of workers not in the
190/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
undertaking’s own workforce and reported under the scope of ESRS S2) include: workers for a supplier
contracted by the undertaking who work on the supplier’s premises using the supplier’s work methods; workers
for a ‘downstream’ entity which purchases goods or services from the undertaking; and workers of an equipment
supplier to the undertaking who, at one or more of the undertaking’s workplaces, perform regular maintenance
on the supplier’s equipment (for example, photocopier) as stipulated in the contract between the equipment
supplier and the undertaking.
AR 63. If the undertaking cannot report exact figures, it shall use estimates according to the provisions in ESRS 1 to
disclose the number of people in its own workforce who are not employees to the nearest ten or, where the
number of people in its own workforce who are not employees is greater than 1 000, to the nearest 100, and
explain this. In addition, it shall clearly identify the information that derives from actual data and estimates.
AR 64. Disclosing the number of people in the undertaking’s own workforce who are not employees at the end of the
reporting period provides information for that point in time without capturing fluctuations during the reporting
period. Disclosing this number as an average across the reporting period considers fluctuations during the
reporting period and can provide more insightful and relevant information for users.
AR 65. The information disclosed by the undertaking allows users to understand how the number of non-employees in
the undertaking’s own workforce varies during the reporting period or compared to the previous reporting
period (i.e., whether the numbers have increased or decreased). The undertaking may also disclose the reasons
for the fluctuations. For example, an increase in the number of non-employees during the reporting period
could be due to a seasonal event. Conversely, a decrease in the number of non-employees compared to the
previous reporting period could be due to the completion of a temporary project. If the undertaking discloses
fluctuations, it shall also explain the criteria used to determine which fluctuations it discloses. If there are no
significant fluctuations in the number of non-employees during the reporting period or between the current and
previous reporting period, the undertaking may disclose this information.
Disclosure Requirement S1-8 – Collective bargaining coverage and social dialogue
Collective bargaining coverage
AR 66. The percentage of employees covered by collective bargaining agreements is calculated using the following
formula:
AR 67. The employees in the undertaking’s own workforce covered by collective bargaining agreements are those
individuals to whom the undertaking is obliged to apply the agreement. This means that if none of the
employees are covered by a collective bargaining agreement, the percentage reported is zero. An employee in the
undertaking’s own workforce covered by more than one collective bargaining agreement only needs to be
counted once.
AR 68. This requirement is not aimed at obtaining the percentage of employees represented by a works council or
belonging to trade unions, which can be different. The percentage of employees covered by collective bargaining
agreements can be higher than the percentage of unionised employees when the collective bargaining agreements
apply to both union and non-union members. Alternatively, the percentage of employees covered by collective
bargaining agreements can be lower than the percentage of unionised employees. This may be the case when
there are no collective bargaining agreements available or when the collective bargaining agreements do not
cover all unionised employees.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 191/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Social Dialogue
AR 69. For calculating the information required by paragraph 63(a), the undertaking shall identify in which European
Economic Area (EEA) countries it has significant employment (i.e., at least 50 employees representing at least
10% of its total employees). For these countries it shall report the percentage of employees in that country which
are employed in establishments in which employees are represented by workers’ representatives. Establishment is
defined as any place of operations where the undertaking carries out a non-transitory economic activity with
human means and goods. Examples include: a factory, a branch of a retail chain, or an undertaking’s
headquarters. For countries in which there is only one establishment the percentage reported shall be either
100% or 0%.
AR 70. The information required by this Disclosure Requirement shall be reported as follows
Table 1
Reporting template for collective bargaining coverage and social dialogue
Collective Bargaining Coverage Social dialogue
Employees – Non-EEA Workplace representation (EEA
Employees – EEA
(estimate for regions with >50 only)
Coverage Rate (for countries with >50 empl.
empl. representing >10% total (for countries with >50 empl.
representing >10% total empl.)
empl) representing >10% total empl)
0-19% Region A
20-39% Country A Region B
40-59% Country B Country A
60-79% Country B
80-100%
Disclosure Requirement S1-9 – Diversity metrics
AR 71. In preparing the disclosure on gender at top management, the undertaking shall use the definition of top
management as one and two levels below the administrative and supervisory bodies unless this concept has
already been defined with the undertaking’s operations and differs from the previous description. If this is the
case, the undertaking can use its own definition for top management and disclose that fact and its own definition.
Disclosure Requirement S1-10 – Adequate Wages
AR 72. The lowest wage shall be calculated for the lowest pay category, excluding interns and apprentices. This is to be
based on the basic wage plus any fixed additional payments that are guaranteed to all employees. The lowest
wage shall be considered separately for each country in which the undertaking has operations, except outside the
EEA when the relevant adequate or minimum wage is defined at a sub national level.
AR 73. The adequate wage benchmark used for comparison with the lowest wage shall not be lower than:
(a) in the EEA: the minimum wage set in accordance with Directive (EU) 2022/2041 of the European Parliament
and of the Council(103) on adequate minimum wages in the European Union. In the period until Directive
(EU) 2022/2041 enters into application, where there is no applicable minimum wage determined by
legislation or collective bargaining in an EEA country, the undertaking shall use an adequate wage
(103) Directive (EU) 2022/2041 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 October 2022 on adequate minimum wages in the
European Union (OJ L 275, 25.10.2022, p. 33).
192/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
benchmark that is either not lower than the minimum wage in a neighboring country with a similar socio-
economic status or not lower than a commonly-referenced international norm such as 60% of the country's
median wage and 50% of the gross average wage.
(b) outside of the EEA:
i. the wage level established in any existing international, national or sub-national legislation, official
norms or collective agreements, based on an assessment of a wage level needed for a decent standard of
living;
ii. if none of the instruments identified in (i) exist, any national or sub-national minimum wage established
by legislation or collective bargaining; or
iii. if none of the instruments identified in (i) or (ii) exist, any benchmark that meets the criteria set out by
the Sustainable Trade Initiative (IDH) (‘Roadmap on Living Wages - A Platform to Secure Living Wages in
Supply Chains’), including applicable benchmarks aligned with the Anker methodology, or provided by
the Wage Indicator Foundation or Fair Wage Network, provided the primacy of collective bargaining for
the establishment of terms and conditions of employment is ensured.
AR 74. Directive (EU) 2022/2041 on adequate minimum wages in the European Union references both indicative
reference values commonly used at international level such as 60 % of the gross median wage and 50 % of the
gross average wage, and/or indicative reference values used at national level. Data for the indicative values of
60% of the national median gross wage or 50% of the national average gross wage can be obtained from the
European Labour Force Survey.
Disclosure Requirement S1-11 – Social protection
AR 75. Social protection refers to all the measures that provide access to health care and income support in cases of
challenging life events such as the loss of a job, being sick and in need of medical care, giving birth and raising a
child, or retiring and in need of a pension.
Disclosure Requirement S1-12 – Persons with disabilities
AR 76. When disclosing the information required in paragraph 77 regarding persons with disabilities, the undertaking
shall provide any contextual information necessary to understand the data and how the data has been compiled
(methodology). For example, information about the impact of different legal definitions of persons with
disabilities in the different countries in which the undertaking has operations.
Disclosure Requirement S1-13 – Training and Skills Development metrics
AR 77. A regular performance review is defined as a review based on criteria known to the employee and his or her
superior undertaken with the knowledge of the employee at least once per year. The review can include an
evaluation by the worker’s direct superior, peers, or a wider range of employees. The review can also involve the
human resources department. In order to disclose the information required by paragraph 83 (a), the undertaking
shall use the employee headcount figures provided in Disclosure Requirement ESRS S1-6 in the denominator to
calculate the:
(a) number/proportion of performance reviews per employee; and
(b) number of reviews in proportion to the agreed number of reviews by the management.
AR 78. To disclose the average required per paragraph 83 (b), the undertaking shall perform the following calculation:
total number of training hours offered to and completed by employees per gender category divided by the total
number of employees per gender category. For the total training average and the average by gender, the head
count figures for total employment and employment by gender reported in Disclosure Requirement ESRS S1-6
shall be used.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 193/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 79. Employee categories are a breakdown of employees by level (such as senior management, middle management) or
function (such as technical, administrative, production). This information is derived from the undertaking’s own
human resources system. In categorising the workforce, the undertaking shall define reasonable and meaningful
employee categories which enable users of the information to understand different performance measures
between the categories. The undertaking may present a category for executive and non- executive employees.
Disclosure Requirement S1-14 – Health and safety metrics
AR 80. In relation to paragraph 88 (a), the percentage of its own workforce who are covered by the undertaking’s health
and safety management system shall be disclosed on a head count basis rather than a full-time equivalent basis.
AR 81. With regard to paragraph 90, when the undertaking’s health and safety management system, or certain parts
thereof, has been subject to an internal audit or external certification, the undertaking may state this fact, or
absence thereof, and the underlying standards for such audits/certifications, as applicable.
AR 82. Fatalities may be reported separately for those resulting from work-related injuries and those resulting from
work-related ill health.
Guidance on “work-related”
AR 83. Work-related injuries and work-related ill health arise from exposure to hazards at work. Notwithstanding,
other types of incidents can occur that are not connected with the work itself. For example, the following
incidents are generally not considered to be work-related, unless otherwise specified in applicable national
legislation:
(a) a person in the workforce suffers a heart attack while at work that it is not connected with work;
(b) a person in the workforce driving to or from work is injured in a car accident (when driving is not part of the
work and where the transport has not been organised by the undertaking); and
(c) a person in the workforce with epilepsy has a seizure at work that is not connected with work.
AR 84. With regard to travelling for work purposes, injuries and ill health that occur while a person is travelling are
work-related if, at the time of the injury or ill health, the person was engaged in work activities “in the interest of
the employer”. Examples of such activities include travelling to and from customer contacts; conducting job tasks;
and entertaining or being entertained to transact, discuss, or promote business (at the direction of the employer).
If the undertaking is responsible for the transport commuting, incidents occurred while commuting are
considered to be work-related. Nonetheless, incidents which arise during travel, outside of the undertaking’s
responsibility (i.e., regular commuting to and from work), may be reported separately provided that the
undertaking has such data available across the undertaking.
AR 85. With regard to working from home, injuries and ill health that occur when working from home are work-related,
if the injury or ill health occurs while the person is performing work from home; and the injury or ill health is
directly related to the performance of work rather than the general home environment or setting.
AR 86. With regard to mental illness, it is considered to be work-related, if it has been notified voluntarily by the person
concerned and it is supported by an opinion from a licensed healthcare professional with appropriate training
and experience; and if such opinion states that the illness is work-related.
194/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 87. Health issues resulting, for example, from smoking, drug and alcohol abuse, physical inactivity, unhealthy diets,
and psychosocial factors unrelated to work are not considered work-related.
AR 88. Occupational diseases are not considered work-related injuries but are covered under work-related ill health.
Guidance on computing the rate of work-related injuries
AR 89. In computing the rate of work-related injuries, the undertaking shall divide the respective number of cases by the
number of total hours worked by people in its own workforce and multiplied by 1 000 000. Thereby, these rates
represent the number of respective cases per one million hours worked. A rate based on 1 000 000hours worked
indicates the number of work-related injuries per 500 full time people in the workforce over a 1-year timeframe.
For comparability purposes a rate based on 1 000 000hours worked shall be used also for undertakings with less
than 500 people in the workforce.
AR 90. If the undertaking cannot directly calculate the number of hours worked, it may estimate this on the basis of
normal or standard hours of work, taking into account entitlements to periods of paid leave of absence from
work (for example, paid vacations, paid sick leave, public holidays) and explain this in its disclosures.
AR 91. An undertaking shall include fatalities as a result of work-related injury in the calculation of the number and rate
of recordable work-related injuries.
Guidance on recordable work-related ill health
AR 92. Work-related ill health can include acute, recurring, and chronic health problems caused or aggravated by work
conditions or practices. These include musculoskeletal disorders, skin and respiratory diseases, malignant
cancers, diseases caused by physical agents (for example, noise-induced hearing loss, vibration-caused diseases),
and mental illnesses (for example, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder). For the purpose of the required
disclosures, the undertaking shall, at a minimum, include in its disclosure those cases outlined in the ILO List of
Occupational Diseases.
AR 93. In the context of this Standard, work-related musculoskeletal disorders are covered under work-related ill health
(and not injuries).
AR 94. The cases to be disclosed in paragraph 88(d) relate to cases of work-related ill health notified to the undertaking
or identified by the undertaking through medical surveillance, during the reporting period. The undertaking
might be notified of cases of work-related ill health through reports by affected people, compensation agencies,
or healthcare professionals. The disclosure may include cases of work-related ill health that were detected during
the reporting period among people who were formerly in the undertaking’s workforce.
Guidance on the number of days lost
AR 95. The undertaking shall count the number of days lost such that the first full day and last day of absence shall be
included. Calendar days should be considered for the calculation, thus days on which the affected individual is
not scheduled for work (for example, weekends, public holidays) will count as lost days.
Disclosure Requirement S1-15 – Work-life balance
AR 96. Family-related leave include maternity leave, paternity leave, parental leave, and carers’ leave that is available
under national law or collective agreements. For the purpose of this Standard, these concepts are defined as:
(a) maternity leave (also called pregnancy leave): employment-protected leave of absence for employed women
directly around the time of childbirth (or, in some countries, adoption);
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 195/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) paternity leave: leave from work for fathers or, where and in so far as recognised by national law, for
equivalent second parents, on the occasion of the birth or adoption of a child for the purposes of providing
care;
(c) parental leave: leave from work for parents on the grounds of the birth or adoption of a child to take care of
that child, as defined by each Member State;
(d) carers’ leave from work: leave for workers to provide personal care or support to a relative, or a person who
lives in the same household, in need of significant care or support for a serious medical reason, as defined by
each Member State.
AR 97. With regard to paragraph 93 (a), employees entitled to family-related leave are those who are covered by
regulations, organisational policies, agreements, contracts or collective bargaining agreements that contain
family-related leave entitlements and have reported their entitlement to the undertaking or the undertaking is
aware of the entitlement.
Disclosure Requirement S1-16 – Remuneration metrics (pay gap and total remuneration)
Pay gap
AR 98. When compiling the information required under paragraph 97 (a) for the gap in pay between its female and male
employees (also known as the “gender pay gap”) the undertaking shall use the following methodology:
(a) include all employees’ gross hourly pay level; and
(b) apply the following formula to calculate the gender pay gap:
AR 99. When disclosing the information required under paragraph 97 (a), the undertaking shall provide any contextual
information necessary to understand the data and how the data has been compiled (methodology). Information
regarding how objective factors such as type of work and country of employment influence the gender pay gap
may be reported.
AR 100. The measure of the undertaking’s gender pay gap shall be reported for the current reporting period and, if
reported in previous sustainability reports, for the previous two reporting periods.
Total remuneration Ratio
AR 101. When compiling the information required by paragraph 97 (b), the undertaking shall:
(a) include all employees;
(b) consider, depending on the undertaking’s remuneration policies, all of the following:
i. base salary, which is the sum of guaranteed, short-term, and non-variable cash compensation;
ii. benefits in cash, which is the sum of the base salary and cash allowances, bonuses, commissions, cash
profit-sharing, and other forms of variable cash payments;
iii. benefits in kind, such as cars, private health insurance, life insurance, wellness programs; and
iv. direct remuneration, which is the sum of benefits in cash, benefits in kind and total fair value of all
annual long-term incentives (for example, stock option awards, restricted stock shares or units,
performance stock shares or units, phantom stock shares, stock appreciation rights, and long-term cash
awards).
196/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(c) apply the following formula for the annual total remuneration ratio:
AR 102. To illustrate the contextual information, the undertaking may provide an explanation to understand the data and
how the data has been compiled (methodology). Quantitative data, such as the annual total remuneration ratio,
may not be sufficient on its own to understand pay disparity and its drivers. For example, pay ratios can be
influenced by the size of the undertaking (for example, revenue, number of employees), its sector, its
employment strategy (for example, reliance on outsourced workers or part-time employees, a high degree of
automation), or currency volatility.
Disclosure Requirement S1-17 –Incidents, complaints and severe human rights impacts
AR 103. In addition to the information required by paragraphs 103 and 104, the undertaking may disclose the status of
incidents and/or complaints and actions taken with reference to the following:
(a) incidents reviewed by the undertaking;
(b) remediation plans being implemented;
(c) remediation plans that have been implemented, with results reviewed through routine internal management
review processes; and
(d) incidents no longer subject to action.
AR 104. If the undertaking compiles the information described in AR 105, it shall consider the following:
(a) an incident is no longer subject to action if it is resolved, the case is completed, or no further action is
required by the undertaking. For example, an incident for which no further action is required can include
cases that are withdrawn or where the underlying circumstances that led to the incident no longer exist;
(b) remedial action is directed toward the alleged harasser and the alleged victim. Remedial action toward the
victim may include offering to pay his/her expenses for counselling sessions, offering the victim some paid
time off, offering to reinstate sick/vacation days if the victim has incurred any expenses due to the
harassment (such as having used sick or vacation days); and
(c) remedial action toward the harasser may include giving the harasser a verbal and/or written warning,
mandating anti-harassment counselling or sending the harasser to an appropriate seminar, harassment
awareness and prevention training. A suspension without pay may also be an option. If the harasser has
been disciplined earlier but his/her harassment does not cease, then more serious discipline may be required.
AR 105. Severe human rights incidents include instances of lawsuits, formal complaints through the undertaking or third-
party complaint mechanisms, serious allegations in public reports or the media, where these are connected to the
undertaking’s own workforce, and the fact of the incidents is not disputed by the undertaking, as well as any other
severe impacts of which the undertaking is aware.
AR 106. In addition to the information required by paragraph 104 above, the undertaking may disclose the number of
severe human rights incidents where the undertaking played a role securing remedy for those affected during the
reporting period.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 197/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix A.1
Application Requirements for ESRS 2 related disclosures
This appendix is an integral part of ESRS S1 Own workforce. It supports the application of the disclosure requirements from
ESRS 2 set out in this standard and has the same authority as the other parts of this Standard. It provides a non-exhaustive
list of the factors to be considered by the undertaking when complying with ESRS 2 SBM-2 and ESRS 2 SBM-3. This
appendix does not provide definitions of the terms mentioned below. All defined terms can be found in Annex II:
Acronyms and Glossary of Terms.
Social and human rights matters Non-exhaustive list of factors to consider in Materiality Assessment
Secure employment % of employees with temporary contracts, ratio of non-employees to
employees, social protection
Working time % of employees with part time or zero-hour contracts, employee satisfaction
with working time
Adequate wages EU, national or local legal definitions of adequate wages, fair wages, and
minimum wages
Social dialogue / existence of work
Extent of workplace, cross-border and board-level representation through
councils / information, consultation and
trade unions and/or works councils
participation rights of workers
Freedom of association/Collective
bargaining including the rate of % of own workforce covered by collective bargaining agreements, work
workforce covered by collective stoppages
agreements
Work-life balance Family-related leave, flexible working hours, access to childcare
Health and safety Coverage by H&S system, rate of fatalities, non-fatal accidents, work-related
ill health, work days lost
Gender equality and equal pay for work of
% of women in top management and workforce, male-female wage gap
equal value
Training and skills development Amount and distribution of training, % of employees with regular
performance and development reviews
The employment and inclusion of people
% employment and accessibility measures for employees with disabilities
with disabilities
Measures against violence and harassment
Prevalence of violence and harassment
in the workplace
Diversity Representation of women and /or ethnic groups or minorities in own
workforce. Age distribution in own workforce. Percentage of persons with
disabilities within the own workforce.
Child labour Type of operations and geographical areas at risk of child labour
Forced labour Type of operations and geographical areas at risk of forced labour
198/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix A.2
Application Requirements for ESRS S1-1 Policies related to own workforce
This appendix is an integral part of the ESRS S1 Own workforce and has the same authority as the other parts of this
Standard. It supports the application of the requirements for Disclosure Requirement ESRS S1-1 for social and human
rights matters with examples of disclosures.
Social and human rights matters Examples of policies:
Secure employment No-layoff policy, limits on renewing temporary contracts, employer
provision of social protection where state provision is lacking
Working time Limitations on overtime, long and split shifts, and night and weekend work,
adequate scheduling of lead times
Adequate wages Policy to ensure all people in own workforce receive an adequate wage
Social dialogue / existence of work Policy to encourage institutions for social dialogue, regular information and
councils / information, consultation and consultation with worker representatives, consultation before final decisions
participation rights of workers on employment-related issues are reached
Freedom of association/Collective Non-interference in trade union formation and recruitment (including trade
bargaining including the rate of workers union access to undertakings), bargaining in good faith, adequate time off
covered by collective agreements for workers’ representatives to carry out their duties, facilities and dismissal
protection for workers' representatives, no discrimination of trade union
members and workers' representatives
Work-life balance Provision of family leave, flexible working time, access to day care facilities
for all employees
Health and safety Coverage of all own workforce in H&S management system
Gender equality and equal work for equal
Policy for gender equality and equal pay for equal work
pay
Training and skills development Policy for enhancing skills and career prospects for employees
The employment and inclusion of people
Policy for making workplaces accessible to persons with disabilities
with disabilities
Measures against violence and harassment
Zero tolerance policy for violence and harassment at workplace
in the workplace
Diversity Policy for inclusiveness (i.e., ethnic diversity or minority groups) and
positive action.
Child labour Policy for identifying where child labour occurs, identifying where exposure
of young workers to hazardous work occurs and preventing risk of exposure
Forced labour Policy for identifying where forced labour occurs and reducing risk of forced
labour
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 199/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix A.3
Application Requirements for ESRS S1–4 Taking action on material impacts on own workforce, and
approaches to mitigating material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to own
workforce, and effectiveness of those actions
This appendix is an integral part of the ESRS S1 Own workforce and has the same authority as the other parts of this
Standard. It supports the application of the requirements for Disclosure Requirement ESRS S1-4 for social and human
rights matters with examples of disclosures:
Social and human rights matters Examples of actions:
Secure employment Offer permanent contracts to employees with temporary contracts,
implement plans for social protection where state provision is lacking
Working time Shift work rotation, extend advance notice of scheduling, reduction of
excessive overtime
Adequate wages Negotiation of fair wages in collective bargaining agreements, verification
that employment agencies pay a fair wage
Social dialogue / existence of work
Expansion of sustainability issues dealt with in social dialogue, increase in
councils / information, consultation and
number of meetings, increase in resources for works councils
participation rights of workers
Freedom of association/Collective
Expansion of sustainability issues dealt with in collective bargaining,
bargaining including the rate of workers
increase in resources for workers’ representatives
covered by collective agreements
Work-life balance Expand family leave eligibility and flexible working time arrangements,
increasing provision of day care
Health and safety Increase health & safety training, investment in safer equipment
Gender equality and equal work for equal Targeted recruitment and promotion of women, reduction in pay gap
pay through negotiation of collective bargaining agreements
Training and skills development Skills audits, training to fill skills gaps
The employment and inclusion of people
Increasing accessibility measures
with disabilities
Measures against violence and harassment Improving complaint mechanisms, increasing sanctions against violence
in the workplace and harassment, providing training for prevention to management
Diversity Training on diversity and inclusion (including ethnicity considerations),
targeted recruitment of underrepresented groups
Child labour Age verification measures, partnerships with organizations to eliminate
child labour, measures against worst forms of child labour
Forced labour Measures ensuring free consent to employment without threat of penalty,
contracts in understandable language, freedom to terminate employment
without penalty, disciplinary measures should not obligate labour, free
consent to overtime, freedom of movement (including to exit workplace),
fair treatment for migrant workers, monitoring employment agencies.
200/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix A.4
Application Requirements for ESRS S1–5 Targets related to managing material negative impacts,
advancing positive impacts, and managing material risks and opportunities
This appendix is an integral part of the ESRS S1 Own workforce and has the same authority as the other parts of this
Standard. It supports the application of the requirements for Disclosure Requirement ESRS S1-5 for social and human
rights matters with examples of disclosures:
Social and human rights matters Examples of targets:
Secure employment Increasing the % of workforce with employment contracts (especially
permanent contracts) and social protection
Working time Increasing the % of workforce with flexible working time arrangements
Adequate wages Ensuring that all people in own workforce receive an adequate wage
Social dialogue / existence of work
councils / information, consultation and Extending social dialogue to more establishments and/or countries
participation rights of workers
Freedom of association/Collective
Increasing the % of own workforce covered by collective bargaining,
bargaining including the rate of workers
negotiating collective bargaining agreements over sustainability issues
covered by collective agreements
Work-life balance Extending work-life measures to a greater % of own workforce
Health and safety Reducing the rate of injuries and worktime lost due to injuries
Gender equality and equal work for equal Increasing the % of women in the workforce and top management, reducing
pay the male-female wage gap
Training and skills development Increasing the % of employees receiving training and regular skills
development reviews
The employment and inclusion of people
Increasing the % of persons with disabilities in own workforce
with disabilities
Measures against violence and harassment
Extending measures to all workplaces
in the workplace
Diversity Increasing the % of underrepresented groups in own workforce and top
management
Child labour Extending measures for preventing exposure of young persons to hazardous
work to a greater % of operations
Forced labour Extending measures for preventing forced labour to a greater number of
operations
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 201/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
ESRS S2
WORKERS IN THE VALUE CHAIN
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Objective
Interaction with other ESRS
Disclosure Requirements
– ESRS 2 General disclosures
Strategy
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-2 Interests and views of stakeholde
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their
interaction with strategy and business model
Impact, risk and opportunity management
— Disclosure Requirement S2-1 – Policies related to value chain workers
— Disclosure Requirement S2-2 – Processes for engaging with value chain workers about impacts
— Disclosure Requirement S2-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for value chain
workers to raise concerns
— Disclosure Requirement S2-4 – Taking action on material impacts on value chain workers, and approaches
to managing material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to value chain workers, and
effectiveness of those action
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement S2-5 – Targets related to managing material negative impacts, advancing positive
impacts, and managing material risks and opportunities
Appendix A: Application Requirements
– Objective
– ESRS 2 General disclosures
Strategy
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-2 - Interests and views of stakeholders
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 - Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their
interaction with strategy and business model
Impact, risk and opportunity management
— Disclosure Requirement S2-1 – Policies related to value chain workers
— Disclosure Requirement S2-2 – Processes for engaging with value chain workers about impacts
— Disclosure Requirement S2-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for value chain
workers to raise concerns
— Disclosure Requirement S2-4 – Taking Action on material impacts, and approaches to mitigating material
risks and pursuing material opportunities related to value chain workers, and effectiveness of those actions
and approaches
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement S2-5 – Targets related to managing material negative impacts, advancing positive
impacts, and managing material risks and opportunities
202/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Objective
1. The objective of this Standard is to specify disclosure requirements which will enable users of the sustainability
statement to understand material impacts on value chain workers connected with the undertaking’s own
operations and value chain, including through its products or services, as well as through its business relationships,
and its related material risks and opportunities, including:
(a) how the undertaking affects workers in its value chain, in terms of material positive and negative actual or
potential impacts;
(b) any actions taken, and the result of such actions, to prevent, mitigate or remediate actual or potential negative
impacts, and to address risks and opportunities;
(c) the nature, type and extent of the undertaking’s material risks and opportunities, including those related to its
impacts and dependencies on workers in the value chain, and how the undertaking manages them; and
(d) the financial effects on the undertaking over the short-, medium- and long-term of material risks and
opportunities, including those arising from the undertaking’s impacts and dependencies on workers in the value
chain.
2. In order to meet the objective, this Standard requires an explanation of the general approach the undertaking takes to
identify and manage any material actual and potential impacts on value chain workers in relation to:
(a) working conditions (for example, secure employment, working time, adequate wage, social dialogue, freedom of
association, including the existence of work councils, collective bargaining, work-life balance and health and
safety);
(b) equal treatment and opportunities for all (for example, gender equality and equal pay for work of equal value,
training and skills development, the employment and inclusion of persons with disabilities, measures against
violence and harassment in the workplace, and diversity);
(c) other work-related rights (for example, child labour, forced labour, adequate housing, water and sanitation and
privacy).
3. This Standard also requires an explanation of how such impacts, as well as the undertaking’s dependencies on value
chain workers, can create material risks or opportunities for the undertaking. For example, negative impacts on
value chain workers may disrupt the undertaking’s operations (through customers refusing to buy its products or
state agencies impounding its goods) and harm its reputation. Conversely, respect for workers’ rights and active
support programmes (for example through financial literacy initiatives) can bring business opportunities, such as
more reliable supply or widening of the future consumer base.
4. This Standard covers all workers in the undertaking’s upstream and downstream value chain who are or can be
materially impacted by the undertaking, including impacts that are connected with the undertaking’s own
operations and value chain, including through its products or services, as well as through its business relationships.
This includes all workers who are not included in the scope of “own workforce” (“own workforce” includes
employees, individual contractors, i.e., self- employed workers, and workers provided by third party undertakings
primarily engaged in ‘employment activities’). Own workforce is covered in ESRS S1 Own workforce. See AR 3 for
examples of what is included in the scope of this Standard.
Interaction with other ESRS
5. This Standard applies when material impacts on and/or material risks and opportunities related to value chain
workers have been identified through the materiality assessment process laid out in ESRS 2 General disclosures.
6. This Standard shall be read in conjunction with ESRS 1 General requirements, and ESRS 2, as well as the ESRS S1, ESRS
S3 Affected communities and ESRS S4 Consumers and end-users.
7. The reporting under this Standard shall be consistent, coherent and where relevant clearly linked with reporting on
the undertaking’s own workforce under ESRS S1, in order to ensure effective reporting.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 203/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Disclosure Requirements
ESRS 2 General disclosures
8. The requirements of this section should be read in conjunction with the disclosures required by ESRS 2 on Strategy
(SBM). The resulting disclosures shall be presented alongside the disclosures required by ESRS 2, except for SBM-3
Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and business model, for which the undertaking
has an option to present the disclosures alongside the topical disclosure.
Strategy
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-2 Interests and views of stakeholders
9. When responding to ESRS 2 SBM-2 paragraph 43, the undertaking shall disclose how the interests, views, and rights
of its value chain workers could be materially impacted by the undertaking, including respect for their human rights,
inform its strategy and business model. Value chain workers are a key group of affected stakeholders.
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with
strategy and business model
10. When responding to ESRS 2 SBM-3 paragraph 48, the undertaking shall disclose:
(a) whether and how actual and potential impacts on value chain workers, as identified in ESRS 2 IRO-1 Description
of the processes to identify and assess material impacts, risks and opportunities: (i) originate from or are connected to the
undertaking’s strategy and business models, and (ii) inform and contribute to adapting the undertaking’s strategy
and business model; and
(b) the relationship between on the one hand its material risks and opportunities arising from impacts and
dependencies on value chain workers, and on the other hand its strategy and business model.
11. When fulfilling the requirements of paragraph ESRS 2 SBM-3 paragraph 48, the undertaking shall disclose whether
all value chain workers who are likely to be materially impacted by the undertaking, including impacts that are
connected with the undertaking’s own operations and value chain, including through its products or services , as
well as through its business relationships, are included in the scope of its disclosure under ESRS 2. In addition, the
undertaking shall provide the following information:
(a) a brief description of the types of value chain workers who could be materially impacted by the undertaking,
including impacts that connected with the undertaking’s own operations and value chain, including through its
products or services, as well as through its business relationships, and specify whether they are:
i. workers working on the undertaking site but who are not part of own workforce, i.e., who are not self-
employed workers or workers provided by third party undertakings primarily engaged in employment
activities (covered through ESRS S1);
ii. workers working for entities in the undertaking’s upstream value chain (e.g., those involved in the extraction
of metals or minerals or harvesting of commodities, in refining, manufacturing or other forms of processing);
iii. workers working for entities in the undertaking’s downstream value chain (e.g., those involved in the
activities of logistics or distribution providers, franchisees, retailers);
iv. workers working in the operations of a joint venture or special purpose vehicle involving the reporting
undertaking;
v. workers who (within the prior categories or additionally) are particularly vulnerable to negative impacts
whether due to their inherent characteristics or to the particular context, such as trade unionists, migrant
workers, home workers, women or young workers.
204/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) any geographies, at country level or other levels, or commodities for which there is a significant risk of child
labour, or of forced labour or compulsory labour, among workers in the undertaking’s value chain(104);
(c) in the case of material negative impacts, whether they are either (i) widespread or systemic in contexts where the
undertaking operates or has sourcing or other business relationships (e.g., child labour or forced labour in
particular commodity supply chains in specific countries or regions), or (ii) related to individual incidents (e.g.,
an industrial accident or an oil spill) or to specific business relationships. This includes consideration of impacts
on value chain workers that may arise from the transition to greener and climate-neutral operations. Potential
impacts include impacts associated with innovation and restructuring, closure of mines, increased mining of
minerals needed for the transition to a sustainable economy, and solar panel production;
(d) in the case of material positive impacts, a brief description of the activities that result in the positive impacts (e.g.,
updated purchasing practices, capacity-building to supply chain workers), including providing opportunities for
the workforce such as job creation and upskilling in the context of a ‘just transition’, and the types of value chain
workers that are positively affected or could be positively affected; the undertaking may also disclose whether the
positive impacts occur in specific countries or regions; and
(e) any material risks and opportunities for the undertaking arising from impacts and dependencies on value chain
workers.
12. In describing the main types of value chain workers who are or could be negatively affected, based on the materiality
assessment set out in ESRS 2 IRO-1, the undertaking shall disclose whether and how it has developed an
understanding of how workers with particular characteristics, those working in particular contexts, or those
undertaking particular activities may be at greater risk of harm.
13. The undertaking shall disclose which, if any, of its material risks and opportunities arising from impacts and
dependencies on its value chain workers relate to specific groups of value chain workers (for example, particular age
groups, workers in a particular factory or country) rather than to all of the value chain workers.
Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure Requirement S2-1 – Policies related to value chain workers
14. The undertaking shall describe its policies adopted to manage its material impacts on value chain workers, as well as
associated material risks and opportunities.
15. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the extent to which the undertaking
has policies that address the identification, assessment, management and/or remediation of material impacts on
value chain workers specifically, as well as policies that cover material risks or opportunities related to value chain
workers.
16. The disclosure required by paragraph 14 shall contain the information on the undertaking’s policies to manage its
material impacts, risks and opportunities related to value chain workers in accordance with ESRS 2 MDR-P Policies
adopted to manage material sustainability matters. In addition, the undertaking shall specify whether such policies cover
specific groups of value chain workers or all value chain workers.
(104) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from additional indicators related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicators number 12 and number 13 in Table III
of Annex I of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments
(“Operations and suppliers at significant risk of incidents of child labour” and “Operations and suppliers at significant risk of
incidents of forced or compulsory labour”).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 205/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
17. The undertaking shall describe its human rights policy commitments(105)that are relevant to value chain workers,
including those processes and mechanisms to monitor compliance with the UN Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights, ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work or OECD Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises(106). In its disclosure, it shall focus on those matters that are material in relation to, as well
as the general approach to:
(a) respect for the human rights, including labour rights, of workers;
(b) engagement with value chain workers; and
(c) measures to provide and/or enable remedy for human rights impacts.
18. The undertaking shall state whether its policies in relation to value chain workers explicitly address trafficking in
human beings(107), forced labour or compulsory labour and child labour. It shall also state whether the undertaking
has a supplier code of conduct(108).
19. The undertaking shall disclose whether and how its policies with regard to value chain workers are aligned with
internationally recognised instruments relevant to value chain workers, including the United Nations (UN) Guiding
Principles on Business and Human Rights(109). The undertaking shall also disclose the extent to which cases of non-
respect of the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles
and Rights at Work or OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises that involve value chain workers have been
reported in its upstream and downstream value chain and, if applicable, an indication of the nature of such cases(110).
Disclosure Requirement S2-2 – Processes for engaging with value chain workers about impacts
20. The undertaking shall disclose its general processes for engaging with value chain workers and their representatives
about actual and potential impacts on them.
(105) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #9 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Lack of a human
rights policy”).
(106) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from a mandatory indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #11 in Table I of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (’Lack of processes
and compliance mechanisms to monitor compliance with UN Global Compact principles and OECD Guidelines for Multinational
Enterprises’).
(107) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #11 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Lack of processes
and measures for preventing trafficking in human beings”).
(108) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #4 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Lack of a supplier
code of conduct”).
(109) This information supports the needs of benchmark administrators to disclose ESG factors subject to Regulation (EU) 2020/1816 as
set out by indicator “Exposure of the benchmark portfolio to companies without due diligence policies on issues addressed by the
fundamental International Labour Organisation Conventions 1 to 8” in section 1 and 2 of Annex II.
(110) This information supports the information needs of: financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from a mandatory indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #10 in Table I of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments; and benchmark
administrators to disclose ESG factors subject to Regulation (EU) 2020/1816 as set out by indicators “Number of benchmark
constituents subject to social violations (absolute number and relative divided by all benchmark constituents), as referred to in
international treaties and conventions, United Nations principles and, where applicable, national law” and “Exposure of the
benchmark portfolio to companies without due diligence policies on issues addressed by the fundamental International Labour
Organisation Conventions 1 to 8” in section 1 and 2 of Annex II.
206/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
21. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of whether and how the undertaking
engages, as part of its ongoing due diligence process, with value chain workers and their legitimate representatives,
or with credible proxies, about material actual and potential positive and/or negative impacts that do or are likely to
affect them, and whether and how perspectives of value chain workers are taken into account in the decision-making
processes of the undertaking.
22. The undertaking shall disclose whether and how the perspectives of value chain workers inform its decisions or
activities aimed at managing the actual and potential impacts on value chain workers. This shall include, where
relevant, an explanation of:
(a) whether engagement occurs with value chain workers or their legitimate representatives directly, or with
credible proxies that have insight into their situation;
(b) the stage(s) at which engagement occurs, the type of engagement, and the frequency of the engagement;
(c) the function and the most senior role within the undertaking that has operational responsibility for ensuring that
this engagement happens, and that the results inform the undertaking’s approach;
(d) where applicable, Global Framework Agreements or for agreements that the undertaking has with global union
federations related to respect of human rights of workers in the value chain, including their right to bargain
collectively, and including an explanation of how the agreement enables the undertaking to gain insight into
those workers’ perspectives; and
(e) where applicable, how the undertaking assesses the effectiveness of its engagement with workers in the value
chain, including, where relevant, any agreements or outcomes that result.
23. Where applicable, the undertaking shall disclose the steps it takes to gain insight into the perspectives of workers that
may be particularly vulnerable to impacts and/or marginalised (for example, women workers, migrant workers,
workers with disabilities).
24. If the undertaking cannot disclose the above required information because it has not adopted a general process to
engage with workers in the value chain, it shall disclose this to be the case. It may disclose a timeframe in which it
aims to have such a process in place.
Disclosure Requirement S2-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for value chain workers to raise
concerns
25. The undertaking shall describe the processes it has in place to provide for or cooperate in the remediation of negative
impacts on value chain workers that the undertaking is connected with, as well as channels available to value chain
workers to raise concerns and have them addressed.
26. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the formal means by which value
chain workers can make their concerns and needs known directly to the undertaking and/or through which the
undertaking supports the availability of such channels (for example, grievance mechanisms ) in the workplace of
value chain workers, how follow up is carried out with these workers regarding the issues raised, and the
effectiveness of these channels.
27. The undertaking shall describe:
(a) its general approach to and processes for providing or contributing to remedy where it has caused or contributed
to a material negative impact on value chain workers, including whether and how the undertaking assesses that
the remedy provided is effective;
(b) any specific channels it has in place for value chain workers to raise their concerns or needs directly with the
undertaking and have them addressed, including whether these are established by the undertaking itself and/or
whether they are third-party mechanisms;
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 207/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(c) the processes through which it supports or requires the availability of such channels in the workplace of value
chain workers; and
(d) how it tracks and monitors issues raised and addressed, and how it ensures the effectiveness of the channels,
including through involvement of stakeholders who are the intended users.
28. The undertaking shall disclose whether and how it assesses that value chain workers are aware of and trust these
structures or processes as a way to raise their concerns or needs and have them addressed. In addition, the
undertaking shall disclose whether it has policies in place regarding the protection of individuals that use them
against retaliation. If such information has been disclosed in accordance with ESRS G1-1, the undertaking may refer
to that information.
29. If the undertaking cannot disclose the above required information because it has not adopted a channel for raising
concerns and/or does not support the availability of such a channel in the workplace of value chain workers, it shall
disclose this to be the case. It may disclose a timeframe in which it aims to have such a channel or processes in place.
Disclosure Requirement S2-4 – Taking action on material impacts on value chain workers, and approaches to managing
material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to value chain workers, and effectiveness of those actions
30. The undertaking shall disclose how it takes action to address material impacts on value chain workers, and to manage
material risks and pursue material opportunities related to value chain workers and the effectiveness of those actions.
31. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is twofold. Firstly, it is to enable an understanding of any actions or
initiatives through which the undertaking seeks to:
(a) prevent, mitigate and remediate the negative material impacts on value chain workers; and/or
(b) achieve positive material impacts for value chain workers.
Secondly, it is to enable an understanding of the ways in which the undertaking is addressing the material risks and
pursuing the material opportunities related to workers in the value chain.
The undertaking shall provide a summarised description of the action plans and resources to manage its material
impacts, risks, and opportunities related to value chain workers as per ESRS 2 MDR-A Actions and resources in relation
to material sustainability matters.
32. In relation to material impacts, the undertaking shall describe:
(a) actions taken, planned or underway to prevent or mitigate material negative impacts on value chain workers;
(b) whether and how it has taken action to provide or enable remedy in relation to an actual material impact;
(c) any additional actions or initiatives it has in place with the primary purpose of delivering positive impacts for
value chain workers; and
(d) how it tracks and assesses the effectiveness of such actions and initiatives in delivering intended outcomes for
value chain workers.
33. In relation to paragraph 30, the undertaking shall describe:
(a) the processes through which it identifies what action is needed and appropriate in response to a particular actual
or potential negative impact on value chain workers;
(b) its approach to taking action in relation to specific material negative impacts on value chain workers, including
any action in relation to its own purchasing or other internal practices, as well as capacity- building or other
forms of engagement with entities in the value chain, or forms of collaborative action with industry peers or
other relevant parties; and
(c) how it ensures that processes to provide or enable remedy in the event of material negative impacts are available
and effective in their implementation and outcomes.
208/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
34. In relation to material risks and opportunities, the undertaking shall describe:
(a) what action is planned or underway to mitigate material risks for the undertaking arising from its impacts and
dependencies on value chain workers and how it tracks effectiveness in practice; and
(b) what action is planned or underway to pursue material opportunities for the undertaking in relation to value
chain workers.
35. The undertaking shall disclose whether and how it takes action to avoid causing or contributing to material negative
impacts on value chain workers through its own practices, including, where relevant, in relation to procurement,
sales and data use. This may include disclosing what approach is taken when tensions arise between the prevention
or mitigation of material negative impacts and other business pressures.
36. The undertaking shall also disclose whether severe human rights issues and incidents connected to its upstream and
downstream value chain have been reported and, if applicable, disclose these(111).
37. When disclosing the information required under paragraph 32 (c), the undertaking shall consider ESRS 2 (see ESRS 2
MDR-T Tracking effectiveness of policies and actions through targets) if it evaluates the effectiveness of an action by
setting a target.
38. The undertaking shall disclose what resources are allocated to the management of its material impacts, with
information that enables users to gain an understanding of how the material impacts are managed.
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement S2-5 – Targets related to managing material negative impacts, advancing positive impacts, and
managing material risks and opportunities
39. The undertaking shall disclose the time-bound and outcome-oriented targets it may have set related to:
(a) reducing negative impacts on value chain workers; and/or
(b) advancing positive impacts on value chain workers; and/or
(c) managing material risks and opportunities related to value chain workers.
40. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the extent to which the undertaking is
using time-bound and outcome-oriented targets to drive and measure its progress in addressing material negative
impacts, and/or advancing positive impacts on value chain workers, and/or in managing material risks and
opportunities related to value chain workers.
41. The summarised description of the targets to manage its material impacts, risks and opportunities related to value
chain workers shall contain the information requirements defined in ESRS 2 MDR-T.
42. The undertaking shall disclose the process for setting the targets, including whether and how the undertaking
engaged directly with workers in the value chain, their legitimate representatives, or with credible proxies that have
insight into their situation in:
(a) setting any such targets;
(b) tracking the undertaking’s performance against them; and
(c) identifying any lessons or improvements as a result of the undertaking’s performance.
(111) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #14 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Number of
identified cases of severe human rights issues and incidents”).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 209/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix A
Application Requirements
This appendix is an integral part of the ESRS S2 Workers in the value chain. It supports the application of the disclosure
requirements set out in this standard and has the same authority as the other parts of ESRS S2.
Objective
AR 1. In addition to the issues listed in paragraph 2, the undertaking may also consider disclosing information about
other issues relevant to a material impact for a shorter period of time, for instance initiatives regarding the health
and safety of value chain workers during a pandemic.
AR 2. The overview of social and human rights matters provided in paragraph 2 is not meant to imply that all of these
issues should be disclosed in each Disclosure Requirement in this Standard. Rather, it provides a list of matters
that the undertaking shall consider in its materiality assessment (ref. to ESRS 1 chapter 3 Double materiality as the
basis for sustainability disclosures and ESRS 2 IRO-1) related to value chain workers and, as appropriate, disclose as
material impacts, risks and opportunities within the scope of this Standard.
AR 3. Examples of workers that fall within the scope of this Standard are:
(a) workers of outsourced services working in the workplace of the undertaking (e.g., third party catering or
security workers);
(b) workers of a supplier contracted by the undertaking who work on the supplier’s premises using the supplier’s
work methods;
(c) workers for a ‘downstream’ entity which purchases goods or services from the undertaking;
(d) workers of an equipment supplier to the undertaking who, at a workplace controlled by the undertaking,
perform regular maintenance on the supplier’s equipment (e.g., photocopier) as stipulated in the contract
between the equipment supplier and the undertaking; and
(e) workers deeper in the supply chain who are extracting commodities that are then processed into components
that go in the undertaking’s products.
ESRS 2 General disclosures
Strategy
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-2 - Interests and views of stakeholders
AR 4. Disclosure Requirement ESRS 2 SBM-2 requires the undertaking to provide an understanding of whether and how
it considers the role that its strategy and business model may play in creating, exacerbating or mitigating
significant material impacts on value chain workers, and whether and how the business model and strategy are
adapted to address such material impacts.
AR 5. While value chain workers may not be engaging with the undertaking at the level of its strategy or business model,
their views can inform the undertaking’s assessment of its strategy and business model. The undertaking may
disclose the views of the value chain workers and value chain workers’ representatives.
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 - Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with
strategy and business model
AR 6. Impacts on value chain workers can originate in the undertaking’s strategy or business model in a number of
different ways. For example, impacts may relate to the undertaking’s value proposition (such as providing lowest
cost products or services, or high-speed delivery, in ways that put pressure on labour rights in the upstream and
210/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
downstream value chains), its value chain (such as relying on commodities of unclear provenance, without
visibility on impacts on workers), or its cost structure and the revenue model (e.g. shifting inventory risk to
suppliers, with knock-on effects on the labour rights of their workers).
AR 7. Impacts on value chain workers that originate in the strategy or the business model can also bring material risks
to the undertaking. For example, in the context of a pandemic or other severe health crisis, undertakings that rely
on contingent labour with little to no access to sick care and health benefits may face severe operational and
business continuity risks as workers have no choice but to keep working while sick, further exacerbating the
spread of the disease and causing major supply chain breakdowns. Another example is where selling goods
premised on cheapest prices for customers create operational risks as suppliers under extreme price pressure may
sub-contract production, leading to lower quality, and a longer, less transparent, and less controllable supply chain.
Reputational and business opportunity risks linked to the exploitation of low-skilled, low-paid workers in sourcing
geographies with minimal protections for them are also increasing with media backlash and consumer preferences
moving to more ethically sourced or sustainable goods.
AR 8. Examples of particular characteristics of value chain workers that may be considered by the undertaking when
responding to paragraph 12 relate to young workers that may be more susceptible to impacts on their physical
and mental development, or women workers in a context where women are routinely discriminated against in the
terms and conditions of work, or migrant workers in a context where the market for the supply of labour is poorly
regulated and workers are routinely charged recruitment fees. For some workers, the inherent nature of the activity
that they are required to undertake may put them at risk (e.g., workers required to handle chemicals or operate
certain equipment or low paid workers who are on “zero hours” contracts).
AR 9. With regard to paragraph 13, material risks could also arise because of the undertaking’s dependency on value
chain workers where low likelihood but high impact events may trigger financial effects; for example, where a
global pandemic leads to severe health impacts on workers at all stages of the value chain resulting in major
disruptions to production and distribution. Other examples of risk related to the undertaking’s dependency on
value chain workers include a shortage in skilled workers or political decisions or legislation affecting value chain
workers working for logistics providers. For example, if some workers in the undertaking’s value chain are at risk
of forced labour, and the undertaking is importing products into countries where the law allows for the
confiscation of imported goods that are suspected of being made with forced labour.
Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure Requirement S2-1 – Policies related to value chain workers
AR 10. If the policies are limited to the undertaking’s own workforce and do not cover workers in upstream and
downstream entities and relationships, they shall be disclosed under ESRS S1 and not in relation to this
requirement.
AR 11. If the disclosures under ESRS S1 include information relevant for workers in the value chain, a reference to this can
be made here; disclosures on the remaining elements shall then be fulfilled under this Disclosure Requirement.
AR 12. The undertaking may disclose explanations of significant changes to the policies adopted during the reporting year
(e.g., new expectations for suppliers, new or additional approaches to due diligence and remedy).
AR 13. The policy may take the form of a stand-alone policy regarding value chain workers or be included in a broader
document such as a code of ethics or a general sustainability policy that has already been disclosed by the
undertaking as part of another ESRS. In those cases, the undertaking shall provide an accurate cross-reference to
identify the aspects of the policy that satisfy the requirements of this Disclosure Requirement.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 211/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 14. When disclosing the alignment of its policies with the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, the
undertaking shall consider that the Guiding Principles refer to the International Bill of Rights, which consist of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the two Covenants that implement it, as well as the International
Labour Organisation’s Declaration on Fundamental Rights and Principles at Work and the core conventions that
underpin it, and may disclose its alignment with these instruments.
AR 15. When disclosing how external-facing policies are embedded, the undertaking may, for example, consider internal
policies of responsible sourcing, and alignment with other policies relevant to value chain workers, for example,
regarding forced labour. With regard to supplier codes of conduct that the undertaking may have, the summary
shall indicate whether they include provisions addressing the safety of workers, precarious work (for example, the
use of workers on short-term or limited hours contracts, workers employed via third parties, sub-contracting to
third parties or use of informal workers), human trafficking, the use of forced labour or child labour, and whether
such provisions are fully in line with applicable ILO standards.
AR 16. The undertaking may provide an illustration of the types of communication of its policies to those individuals,
group of individuals or entities for whom they are relevant, either because they are expected to implement them
(for example, the undertaking’s employees, contractors and suppliers), or because they have a direct interest in
their implementation (for example, own workers, investors). It may disclose communication tools and channels
(for example, flyers, newsletters, dedicated websites, social media, face to face interactions, workers’
representatives), aimed at ensuring that the policy is accessible and that different audiences understand its
implications. The undertaking may also explain how it identifies and removes potential barriers for dissemination,
such as through translation into relevant languages or the use of graphic depictions.
Disclosure Requirement S2-2 – Processes for engaging with value chain workers about impacts
AR 17. When describing which function or role has operational responsibility for such engagement and/or ultimate
accountability, the undertaking may disclose whether this is a dedicated role or function or part of a broader role
or function, and whether any capacity building activities have been offered to support the staff to undertake
engagement. If it cannot identify such a position or function, it may state that this is the case. This disclosure
could also be fulfilled by making reference to information disclosed according to ESRS 2 GOV-1 The role of the
administrative, management and supervisory bodies.
AR 18. When preparing the disclosures described in paragraph 22 b) and c), the following illustrations may be considered:
(a) examples of stages at which engagement occurs are i) determining the approach to mitigation and ii) evaluation
the effectiveness of mitigation;
(b) for type of engagement, these could be participation, consultation and/or information;
(c) for the frequency of the engagement, information may be provided on whether engagement occurs on a
regular basis, at certain points in a project or business process, for example, when a new harvest season begins
or a new production line is opened, as well as whether it occurs in response to legal requirements and/or in
response to stakeholder requests and whether the result of the engagement is being integrated into the
undertaking's decision- making processes; and
(d) for the role with operational responsibility, whether the undertaking requires relevant staff to have certain
skills, or whether it provides training or capacity building to relevant staff to undertake engagement.
AR 19. Global Framework Agreements (GFA) serve to establish an ongoing relationship between a multinational
enterprise and a Global Union Federation to ensure that the undertaking adheres to the same standards in every
country in which it operates.
212/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 20. To illustrate how the perspectives of value chain workers have informed specific decisions or activities of the
undertaking, the undertaking may provide examples from the current reporting period.
Disclosure Requirement S2-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for value chain workers to raise
concerns
AR 21. In fulfilling the requirements set out by Disclosure Requirement ESRS S2-3, the undertaking may be guided by the
content of the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights and the OECD Guidelines for Multinational
Enterprises focused on remediation and grievance mechanisms.
AR 22. Channels for raising concerns or needs include grievance mechanisms, hotlines, trade unions (where workers are
unionised), dialogue processes or other means through which value chain workers or their legitimate
representatives can raise concerns about impacts or explain needs that they would like the undertaking to
address. This could include both channels provided by the undertaking directly and channels provided by the
entities where the value chain workers are working, in addition to any other mechanisms the undertaking may use
to gain insight into the management of impacts on workers, such as compliance audits. Where the undertaking is
relying solely on information about the existence of such channels provided by its business relationships to
answer this requirement, it may state that.
AR 23. To provide greater insight into the information covered in Disclosure Requirement ESRS S2-3, the undertaking
may explain whether and how value chain workers that may be affected are able to access channels at the level of
the undertaking they are employed by, or contracted to work for, in relation to each material impact.
AR 24. Third party mechanisms could include those operated by the government, NGOs, industry associations and other
collaborative initiatives. The undertaking may disclose whether these are accessible to all workers who may be
potentially or actually materially impacted by the undertaking, or individuals or organisations acting on their
behalf or who are otherwise in a position to be aware of negative impacts.
AR 25. In relation to the protection of individuals that use the mechanisms against the retaliation, the undertaking may
describe whether it treats grievances confidentially and with respect to the rights of privacy and data protection;
and whether the mechanisms allow for workers to use them anonymously (for example, through representation
by a third party).
AR 26. In disclosing whether and how the undertaking knows that value chain workers are aware of and trust any of these
channels, the undertaking may provide relevant and reliable data about the effectiveness of these channels from the
perspective of value chain workers themselves. Examples of sources of information are surveys of workers that
have used such channels and their levels of satisfaction with the process and outcomes.
AR 27. In describing the effectiveness of channels for value chain workers to raise concerns, the undertaking may be
guided by the following questions, based on the “effectiveness criteria for non-judicial grievance mechanisms”, as
laid out in the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, in particular Principle 31. The below
considerations may be applied to individual channels or to a collective system of channels:
(a) do the channels hold legitimacy by providing appropriate accountability for their fair conduct and building
stakeholder trust?
(b) are the channels known and accessible to stakeholders?
(c) do the channels have clear and known procedures, with indicative timeframes?
(d) do the channels ensure reasonable access for stakeholders to sources of information, advice and expertise?
(e) do the channels offer transparency by providing sufficient information both to complainants and, where
applicable, to meet any public interest?
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 213/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(f) do outcomes achieved through the channels accord with internationally recognised human rights?
(g) does the undertaking identify insights from the channels that support continuous learning in both improving
the channels and preventing future impacts?
(h) does the undertaking focus on dialogue with complainants as the means to reach agreed solutions, rather than
seeking to unilaterally determine the outcome?
Disclosure Requirement S2-4 – Taking action on material impacts on value chain workers, and approaches to managing
material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to value chain workers, and effectiveness of those actions
AR 28. It may take time to understand negative impacts and how the undertaking may be involved with them through its
value chain, as well as to identify appropriate responses and put them into practice. Therefore, the undertaking
shall consider:
(a) its general and specific approaches to addressing material negative impacts;
(b) its initiatives aimed at contributing to additional material positive impacts;
(c) how far it has progressed in its efforts during the reporting period; and
(d) its aims for continued improvement.
AR 29. Appropriate action can vary according to whether the undertaking causes or contributes to a material impact or
whether the material impact is directly linked to its own operations, products or services through a business
relationship.
AR 30. Given that material negative impacts affecting value chain workers that have occurred during the reporting period
may also be linked to entities or operations outside its direct control, the undertaking may disclose whether and
how it seeks to use its leverage in its business relationships to manage those impacts. This may include using
commercial leverage (for example, enforcing contractual requirements with business relationships or
implementing incentives), other forms of leverage within the relationship (such as providing training or capacity-
building on workers’ rights to entities with which the undertaking has a business relationships) or collaborative
leverage with peers or other actors (such as initiatives aimed at responsible recruitment or ensuring workers
receive an adequate wage).
AR 31. When the undertaking discloses its participation in an industry or multi-stakeholder initiative as part of its actions
to address material negative impacts, the undertaking may disclose how the initiative, and its own involvement, is
aiming to address the material impact concerned. It may disclose under ESRS S2-5 the relevant targets set by the
initiative and progress towards them.
AR 32. When disclosing whether and how the undertaking considers actual and potential impacts on value chain workers
in decisions to terminate business relationships and whether and how it seeks to address any negative impacts that
may result from termination, the undertaking may include examples.
AR 33. In disclosing how it tracks the effectiveness of its actions to manage material impacts during the reporting period,
the undertaking may disclose any lessons learned from the previous and current reporting periods.
AR 34. Processes used to track the effectiveness of actions can include internal or external auditing or verification, court
proceedings and/or related court decisions, impact assessments, measurement systems, stakeholder feedback,
grievance mechanisms, external performance ratings, and benchmarking.
AR 35. Reporting on effectiveness is aimed at enabling the understanding of the links between actions taken by the
undertaking and the effective management of impacts. For example, to show the effectiveness of its actions to
support its suppliers with improving their working conditions, the undertaking may disclose survey feedback
from the suppliers’ workers showing that working conditions have improved since the time the undertaking
began working with those suppliers. Additional information that the undertaking may provide includes data
showing a decrease in the number of incidents identified through for instance, independent audits.
214/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 36. With regard to initiatives or processes the undertaking has in place that are based on affected workers’ needs and
with regard to progress in the implementation of such initiatives or processes, the undertaking may disclose:
(a) information about whether and how value chain workers and legitimate representatives or their credible
proxies play a role in decisions regarding the design and implementation of these programmes or processes;
and
(b) information about the intended or achieved positive outcomes for value chain workers of these initiatives or
processes.
AR 37. The undertaking may disclose whether any initiatives or processes whose primary aim is to deliver positive
impacts for value chain workers are designed also to support the achievement of one or more of the UN
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). For example, through a commitment to advance UN SDG 8 to “promote
sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all”
the undertaking may be providing capacity-building to smallholders in its supply chain, resulting in increases in
their income; or it may be supporting training to increase the proportion of women able to take delivery jobs in
its downstream value chain.
AR 38. When disclosing the intended or achieved positive outcomes of its actions for value chain workers a distinction is
to be made between evidence of certain activities having occurred (e.g., that x number of workers have received
financial literacy training) from evidence of actual outcomes for workers (e.g., that x workers report that they are
able to better manage their household budgets so as to meet their savings goals).
AR 39. When disclosing whether initiatives or processes also play a role in mitigating material negative impacts, the
undertaking may e.g., consider programmes that aim to advance women workers’ financial literacy that have
resulted in more women being promoted as well as in reports of reduced sexual harassment in the workplace.
AR 40. When disclosing the material risks and opportunities related to the undertaking’s impacts or dependencies on
value chain workers, the undertaking may consider the following:
(a) risks related to the undertaking’s impacts on value chain workers may include the reputational or legal
exposure where value chain workers are found to be subject to forced labour or child labour;
(b) risks related to the undertaking’s dependencies on value chain workers may include disruption of business
operations where a pandemic closes significant parts of its supply chain or distribution network;
(c) opportunities related to the undertaking’s impacts on value chain workers may include market differentiation
and greater customer appeal from guaranteeing decent pay and conditions for non-employee workers; and
(d) business opportunities related to the undertaking’s dependencies on value chain workers might include the
achievement of a future sustainable supply of a commodity by ensuring smallholder farmers earn enough to
persuade future generations to keep farming that crop.
AR 41. When disclosing whether dependencies turn into risks, the undertaking shall consider external developments.
AR 42. When disclosing policies, actions and resources and targets related to the management of material risks and
opportunities, in cases where risks and opportunities arise from a material impact, the undertaking may cross-
reference its disclosures on policies, action and resources and targets in relation to that impact.
AR 43. The undertaking shall consider whether and how its process(es) to manage material risks related to value chain
workers are integrated into its existing risk management process(es).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 215/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 44. When disclosing the resources allocated to the management of material impacts, the undertaking may disclose
which internal functions are involved in managing the impacts and what types of action they take to address
negative and advance positive impacts.
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement S2-5 – Targets related to managing material negative impacts, advancing positive impacts, and
managing material risks and opportunities
AR 45. When disclosing information about targets in accordance with paragraph 39, the undertaking may disclose:
(a) the intended outcomes to be achieved in the lives of value chain workers, being as specific as possible;
(b) the stability of the targets over time in terms of definitions and methodologies to enable comparability over
time;
(c) the standards or commitments on which the targets are based (for instance codes of conduct, sourcing policies,
global frameworks or industry codes).
AR 46. Targets related to material risks and opportunities may be the same as or distinct from targets related to material
impacts. For example, a target to reach living wages for supply chain workers could both reduce impacts on those
workers and reduce associated risks in terms of the quality and reliability of supply.
AR 47. The undertaking may also distinguish between short-, medium- and long-term targets covering the same policy
commitment. For example, the undertaking may have a long-term target to achieve an 80% reduction in health
and safety incidents affecting the workers of a given supplier by 2030 and a near-term target to reduce their
overtime hours of delivery drivers by x% while maintaining their income by 2024.
AR 48. When modifying or replacing a target in the reporting period, the undertaking may explain the change by cross-
referencing it to significant changes in the business model or to broader changes in the accepted standard or
legislation from which the target is derived to provide contextual information, as per ESRS 2 BP-2 Disclosures in
relation to specific circumstances.
216/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
ESRS S3
AFFECTED COMMUNITIES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Objective
Interaction with other ESRS
Disclosure Requirements
– ESRS 2 General disclosures
Strategy
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-2 – Interests and views of stakeholders
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 - Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their
interaction with strategy and business model
Impact, risk and opportunity management
— Disclosure Requirement S3-1 – Policies related to affected communities
— Disclosure Requirement S3-2 – Processes for engaging with affected communities about impacts
— Disclosure Requirement S3-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for affected
communities to raise concerns
— Disclosure Requirement S3-4 – Taking action on material impacts on affected communities, and approaches
to managing material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to affected communities, and
effectiveness of those actions
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement S3-5 – Targets related to managing material negative impacts, advancing positive
impacts, and managing material risks and opportunitie
Appendix A: Application Requirements
– Objective
– ESRS 2 General Disclosures
Strategy
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-2 – Interests and views of stakeholders
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 - Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their
interaction with strategy and business model
Impact, risk and opportunity management
— Disclosure Requirement S3-1 – Policies related to affected communities
— Disclosure Requirement S3-2 – Processes for engaging with affected communities about impacts
— Disclosure Requirement S3-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for affected
communities to raise concerns
— Disclosure Requirement S3-4 – Taking action on material impacts, and approaches to mitigating material
risks and pursuing material opportunities related to affected communities, and effectiveness of those
actions and approaches
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement S3-5 – Targets related to managing material negative impacts, advancing positive
impacts, and managing material risks and opportunities
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 217/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Objective
1. The objective of this Standard is to specify disclosure requirements which will enable users of the sustainability
statement to understand material impacts on affected communities connected with the undertaking’s own
operations and value chain, including through its products or services, as well as through its business relationships,
and its related material risks and opportunities, including:
(a) how the undertaking affects communities, in areas where impacts are most likely to be present and severe, in
terms of material positive and negative actual or potential impacts;
(b) any actions taken, and the result of such actions, to prevent, mitigate or remediate actual or potential negative
impacts, and to address risks and opportunities;
(c) the nature, type and extent of the undertaking’s material risks and opportunities related to its impacts and
dependencies on affected communities, and how the undertaking manages them; and
(d) the financial effects on the undertaking over the short-, medium- and long-term of material risks and
opportunities arising from the undertaking’s impacts and dependencies on affected communities.
2. In order to meet the objective, this Standard requires an explanation of the general approach the undertaking takes to
identify and manage any material actual and potential impacts on affected communities in relation to:
(a) communities’ economic, social and cultural rights (for example, adequate housing, adequate food, water and
sanitation, land-related and security-related impacts);
(b) communities’ civil and political rights (for example, freedom of expression, freedom of assembly, impacts on
human rights defenders); and
(c) particular rights of indigenous peoples (for example, free, prior and informed consent, self-determination,
cultural rights).
3. This Standard also requires an explanation of how such impacts, as well as the undertaking’s dependencies on
affected communities, can create material risks or opportunities for the undertaking. For example, negative
relationships with affected communities may disrupt the undertaking’s own operations or harm its reputation,
while constructive relationships can bring business benefits, such as stable and conflict-free operations and a greater
ease of recruiting locally.
Interaction with other ESRS
4. This standard applies when material impacts on and/or material risks and opportunities related to affected
communities have been identified through the materiality assessment process laid out in ESRS 2 General disclosures.
5. This Standard shall be read in conjunction with ESRS 1 General requirements, and ESRS 2, as well as the ESRS S1 Own
workforce, ESRS S2 Workers in the value chain and ESRS S4 Consumers and end-users.
Disclosure Requirements
ESRS 2 General disclosures
6. The requirements of this section should be read in conjunction with the disclosures required by ESRS 2 on Strategy
(SBM). The resulting disclosures shall be presented alongside the disclosures required by ESRS 2, except for SBM-3
Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and business model, for which the undertaking
has an option to present the disclosures alongside the topical disclosure.
218/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Strategy
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-2 – Interests and views of stakeholders
7. When responding to ESRS 2 SBM-2, paragraph 43, the undertaking shall disclose how the views, interests, and rights
of affected communities, including respect for their human rights (and their rights as indigenous peoples, where
applicable), inform its strategy and business model. Affected communities are a key group of affected stakeholders.
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 – Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their
interaction with strategy and business model
8. When responding to ESRS 2 SBM-3 paragraph 48, the undertaking shall disclose:
(a) whether and how actual and potential impacts on affected communities as identified in ESRS 2 IRO-1 Description
of the processes to identify and assess material impacts, risks and opportunities: (i) originate from or are connected to the
undertaking’s strategy and business models, and (ii) inform and contribute to adapting the undertaking’s strategy
and business model; and
(b) the relationship between its material risks and opportunities arising from impacts and dependencies on affected
communities and its strategy and business model.
9. When fulfilling the requirements of paragraph 48, the undertaking shall disclose whether all affected communities
who are likely to be materially impacted by the undertaking, including impacts that are connected with the
undertaking’s own operations and value chain, including through its products or services, as well as through its
business relationships, are included in the scope of its disclosure under ESRS 2. In addition, the undertaking shall
provide the following information:
(a) a brief description of the types of communities subject to material impacts by its own operations or through its
upstream and downstream value chain, and specify whether they are:
i. communities living or working around the undertaking’s operating sites, factories, facilities or other physical
operations, or more remote communities affected by activities at those sites (for example by downstream
water pollution);
ii. communities along the undertaking’s value chain (for example, those affected by the operations of suppliers’
facilities or by the activities of logistics or distribution providers);
iii. communities at one or both endpoints of the value chain (for example, at the point of extraction of metals or
minerals or harvesting of commodities, or communities around waste or recycling sites);
iv. communities of indigenous peoples.
(b) in the case of material negative impacts, whether they are either (i) widespread or systemic in contexts where the
undertaking operates or has sourcing or other business relationships (for example, marginalised populations
suffering impacts on their health and quality of life in a highly industrialised area), or (ii) related to individual
incidents in the undertaking’s own operations (e.g., a toxic waste spill affecting a community’s access to clean
drinking water) or in a specific business relationship (e.g., a peaceful protest by communities against business
operations that was met with a violent response from the undertaking’s security services). This includes
consideration of impacts on affected communities that may arise from the transition to greener and climate-
neutral operations. Potential impacts include impacts associated with innovation and restructuring, closure of
mines, increased mining of minerals needed for the transition to a sustainable economy and solar panel
production;
(c) in the case of material positive impacts, a brief description of the activities that result in the positive impacts (for
example, capacity-building to support more and new forms of local livelihoods) and the types of communities
that are positively affected or could be positively affected; the undertaking may also disclose whether the
positive impacts occur in specific countries or regions; and
(d) any material risks and opportunities for the business arising from impacts and dependencies on affected
communities.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 219/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
10. In describing the main types of communities who are or could be negatively affected, based on the materiality
assessment set out in Disclosure Requirement ESRS 2 IRO-1, the undertaking shall disclose whether and how it has
developed an understanding of how affected communities with particular characteristics or those living in particular
contexts, or those undertaking particular activities may be at greater risk of harm.
11. The undertaking shall disclose which, if any, of its material risks and opportunities arising from impacts and
dependencies on affected communities relate to specific groups of affected communities rather than to all affected
communities.
Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure Requirement S3-1 – Policies related to affected communities
12. The undertaking shall describe its policies adopted to manage its material impacts on affected communities,
as well as associated material risks and opportunities.
13. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the extent to which the undertaking
has policies that address the identification, assessment, management and/or remediation of material impacts on
affected communities specifically, as well as policies that cover material risks or opportunities related to affected
communities.
14. The disclosure required by paragraph 12 shall contain the information on the undertaking’s policies to manage its
material impacts, risks and opportunities related to affected communities in accordance with ESRS 2 MDR-P Policies
adopted to manage material sustainability matters. In addition, the undertaking shall specify if such policies cover specific
affected communities or all affected communities.
15. The undertaking shall disclose any particular policy provisions for preventing and addressing impacts on indigenous
peoples.
16. The undertaking shall describe its human rights policy commitments(112)that are relevant to affected communities,
including those processes and mechanisms to monitor compliance with the UN Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights, ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work or OECD Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises. In its disclosure it shall focus on those matters that are material in relation to(113), as well
as its general approach to:
(a) respect for the human rights of communities, and indigenous peoples specifically;
(b) engagement with affected communities; and
(c) measures to provide and/or enable remedy for human rights impacts.
17. The undertaking shall disclose whether and how its policies with regard to affected communities are aligned with
internationally recognised standards relevant to communities and indigenous peoples specifically, including the
United Nations (UN) Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. The undertaking shall also disclose the
extent to which cases of non-respect of the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, ILO Declaration
(112) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #9 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Lack of a human
rights policy”).
(113) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from a mandatory indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #11 in Table I of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Lack of processes
and compliance mechanisms to monitor compliance with UN Global Compact principles and OECD Guidelines for Multinational
Enterprises”).
220/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work or OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises that involve
affected communities have been reported in its own operations or in its upstream and downstream value chain and,
if applicable, an indication of the nature of such cases(114).
18. The policy may take the form of a stand-alone policy regarding communities or be included in a broader document
such as a code of ethics or a general sustainability policy that has already been disclosed by the undertaking as part
of another ESRS. In those cases, the undertaking shall provide an accurate cross-reference to identify the aspects of
the policy that satisfy the requirements of this Disclosure Requirement.
Disclosure Requirement S3-2 – Processes for engaging with affected communities about impacts
19. The undertaking shall disclose its general processes for engaging with affected communities and their
representatives about actual and potential impacts on them.
20. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of whether and how the undertaking
engages, as part of its ongoing due diligence process, with affected communities, their legitimate representatives, or
with credible proxies, about material actual and potential positive and/or negative impacts that do or are likely to
affect them, and whether and how perspectives of affected communities are taken into account in the decision-
making processes of the undertaking.
21. The undertaking shall disclose whether and how the perspectives of affected communities inform its decisions or
activities aimed at managing actual and potential impacts on communities. This shall include, where relevant, an
explanation of:
(a) whether engagement occurs with affected communities or their legitimate representatives directly, or with
credible proxies that have insight into their situation;
(b) the stage(s) at which engagement occurs, the type of engagement, and the frequency of the engagement;
(c) the function and the most senior role within the undertaking that has operational responsibility for ensuring this
engagement happens, and that the results inform the undertaking’s approach;
(d) where applicable, how the undertaking assesses the effectiveness of its engagement with affected communities,
including, where relevant, any agreements or outcomes that result.
22. Where applicable, the undertaking shall disclose the steps it takes to gain insight into the perspectives of affected
communities that may be particularly vulnerable to impacts and/or marginalised, and into the perspective of specific
groups within the affected communities, such as women and girls.
23. Where affected communities are indigenous peoples, the undertaking shall also disclose how it takes into account
and ensures respect of their particular rights in its stakeholder engagement approach, including their right to free,
prior and informed consent with regard to: (i) their cultural, intellectual, religious and spiritual property; (ii)
activities affecting their lands and territories; and (iii) legislative or administrative measures that affect them. In
particular, where engagement occurs with indigenous peoples, the undertaking shall also disclose whether and how
indigenous peoples have been consulted on the mode and parameters of the engagement (for example, in designing
the agenda, nature, and timeliness of the engagement).
(114) This information supports the information needs of: financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from a mandatory indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #10 in Table I of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Violations of UN
Global Compact principles and Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Guidelines for Multinational
Enterprises”); and benchmark administrators to disclose ESG factors subject to Regulation (EU) 2020/1816 as set out by indicator
“Number of benchmark constituents subject to social violations (absolute number and relative divided by all benchmark
constituents), as referred to in international treaties and conventions, United Nations principles and, where applicable, national law”
in section 1 and 2 of Annex II.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 221/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
24. If the undertaking cannot disclose the above required information because it has not adopted a general process to
engage with affected communities, it shall disclose this to be the case. It may disclose a timeframe in which it aims to
have such a process in place.
Disclosure Requirement S3-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for affected communities to raise
concerns
25. The undertaking shall describe the processes it has in place to provide for or cooperate in the remediation
of negative impacts on affected communities that the undertaking is connected with, as well as channels
available to affected communities to raise concerns and have them addressed.
26. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the formal means by which affected
communities can make their concerns and needs known directly to the undertaking, and/or through which the
undertaking supports the availability of such channels (for example, grievance mechanisms) by its business
relationships, how follow up is performed with these communities regarding the issues raised, and the effectiveness
of these channels.
27. The undertaking shall describe:
(a) its general approach to and processes for providing or contributing to remedy where it has identified that it has
caused or contributed to a material negative impact on affected communities, including whether and how the
undertaking assesses that the remedy provided is effective;
(b) any specific channels it has in place for affected communities to raise their concerns or needs directly with the
undertaking and have them addressed, including whether these are established by the undertaking itself and/or
through participation in third-party mechanisms;
(c) its processes through which the undertaking supports the availability of such channels by its business
relationships; and
(d) how it tracks and monitors issues raised and addressed, and how it ensures the effectiveness of the channels,
including through involvement of stakeholders who are the intended users of those channels.
28. The undertaking shall disclose whether and how it assesses that affected communities are aware of and trust these
structures or processes as a way to raise their concerns or needs and have them addressed. In addition, the
undertaking shall disclose whether it has policies in place regarding the protection of individuals that use them
against retaliation. If such information has been disclosed in accordance with ESRS G1-1, the undertaking may refer
to that information.
29. If the undertaking cannot disclose the above required information because it has not adopted a channel for raising
concerns and/or does not support the availability of such a channel by its business relationships, it shall disclose this
to be the case. It may disclose a timeframe in which it aims to have such a channel or processes in place.
Disclosure Requirement S3-4 – Taking action on material impacts on affected communities, and approaches to
managing material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to affected communities, and effectiveness of
those actions
30. The undertaking shall disclose how it takes action to address material impacts on affected communities, and
to manage material risks and pursue material opportunities related to affected communities and the
effectiveness of those actions.
31. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is twofold. Firstly, it is to provide an understanding of any actions and
initiatives through which the undertaking seeks to:
(a) prevent, mitigate and remediate the negative material impacts on affected communities; and/or
(b) achieve positive material impacts for affected communities.
222/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Secondly, it is to enable an understanding of the ways in which the undertaking is addressing the material risks and
pursuing the material opportunities related to affected communities.
The undertaking shall provide a summarised description of the action plans and resources to manage its material
impacts, risks, and opportunities related to affected communities as per ESRS 2 MDR-A Actions and resources in
relation to material sustainability matters.
32. In relation to material impacts, the undertaking shall describe:
(a) actions taken, planned or underway to prevent or mitigate material negative impacts on affected communities;
(b) whether and how it has taken action to provide or enable remedy in relation to an actual material impact;
(c) any additional actions or initiatives it has in place with the primary purpose of delivering positive impacts for
affected communities; and
(d) how it tracks and assesses the effectiveness of these actions and intiatives in delivering intended outcomes for
affected communities.
33. In relation to paragraph 29, the undertaking shall describe:
(a) the processes through which it identifies what action is needed and appropriate in response to a particular actual
or potential negative impact on affected communities;
(b) its approach to taking action in relation to specific material negative impacts on communities, including any
action in relation to its own practices regarding land acquisition, planning and construction, operation or
closure practices, as well as whether wider industry or collaborative action with other relevant parties will be
required; and
(c) how it ensures that processes to provide or enable remedy in the event of material negative impacts are available
and effective in their implementation and outcomes.
34. In relation to material risks and opportunities, the undertaking shall describe:
(a) what action is planned or underway to mitigate material risks for the undertaking arising from its impacts and
dependencies on affected communities and how it tracks effectiveness in practice; and
(b) what action is planned or underway to pursue material opportunities for the undertaking in relation to affected
communities.
35. The undertaking shall disclose whether and how it takes action to avoid causing or contributing to material negative
impacts on affected communities through its own practices, including, where relevant, in relation to planning, land
acquisition and exploitation, finance, extraction or production of raw materials, use of natural resources, and
management of environmental impacts. This may include disclosing what approach is taken when tensions arise
between the prevention or mitigation of material negative impacts and other business pressures.
36. The undertaking shall also disclose whether severe human rights issues and incidents connected to affected
communities have been reported and, if applicable, disclose these(115).
37. When disclosing the information required under paragraph 31 (c), the undertaking shall consider ESRS 2 MDR-T
Tracking effectiveness of policies and actions through targets if it evaluates the effectiveness of an action by setting a target.
(115) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #14 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Number of
identified cases of severe human rights issues and incidents”).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 223/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
38. The undertaking shall disclose what resources are allocated to the management of its material impacts, with
information that enables users to gain an understanding of how the material impacts are managed.
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement S3-5 – Targets related to managing material negative impacts, advancing positive impacts, and
managing material risks and opportunities
39. The undertaking shall disclose the time-bound and outcome-oriented targets it may have set related to:
(a) reducing negative impacts on affected communities; and/or
(b) advancing positive impacts on affected communities; and/or
(c) managing material risks and opportunities related to affected communities.
40. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the extent to which the undertaking is
using time-bound and outcome-oriented targets to drive and measure its progress in addressing material negative
impacts, and/or advancing positive impacts on affected communities, and/or in managing material risks and
opportunities related to affected communities.
41. The summarised description of the targets to manage its material impacts, risks and opportunities related to affected
communities shall contain the information requirements defined in ESRS 2 MDR-T.
42. The undertaking shall disclose the process for setting the targets, including whether and how the undertaking
engaged directly with affected communities, their legitimate representatives, or with credible proxies that have
insight into their situation in:
(a) setting any such targets;
(b) tracking the undertaking’s performance against them; and
(c) identifying, any, lessons or improvements as a result of the undertaking’s performance.
224/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix A
Application Requirements
This appendix is an integral part of the ESRS S3 Affected communities. It supports the application of the disclosure
requirements set out in this standard and has the same authority as the other parts of the standard.
Objective
AR 1. The overview of social and human rights matters provided in paragraph 2 is not meant to imply that all of these
issues should be disclosed in each Disclosure Requirement in this Standard. Rather, it provides a list of matters
that the undertaking shall consider in its materiality assessment (ref. to ESRS 1 chapter 3 Double materiality as the
basis for sustainability disclosures and ESRS 2 IRO-1) related to affected communities and, as appropriate, disclose as
material impacts, risks and opportunities within the scope of this Standard.
AR 2. In addition to the issues listed in paragraph 2, the undertaking may also consider disclosing information about
other issues relevant to a material impact for a shorter period of time, for instance initiatives regarding the
impacts on communities related to the undertaking’s operations due to extreme and sudden weather conditions.
ESRS 2 General Disclosures
Strategy
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-2 – Interests and views of stakeholders
AR 3. Disclosure Requirement ESRS 2 SBM-2 requires the undertaking to provide an understanding of if and how it
considers the role that its strategy and business model may play in creating, exacerbating or mitigating significant
material impacts on affected communities, and whether and how the business model and strategy are adapted to
address such material impacts.
AR 4. While affected communities may not be engaging with the undertaking at the level of its strategy or business
model, their views can inform the undertaking’s assessment of its strategy and business model. The undertaking
may disclose the views of affected communities and affected communities' representatives.
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 - Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with
strategy and business model
AR 5. Impacts on affected communities can originate in the undertaking’s strategy or business model in a number of
different ways. For example, impacts may relate to the undertaking’s value proposition (such as, construction or
commencement of projects with timelines that do not allow sufficient time for consultation with groups affected
by the projects), its value chain (for example, land-use in countries in which ownership is often contested or
records are unreliable or in which land-users such as indigenous peoples are unrecognised), or its cost structure
and the revenue model (such as, aggressive strategies to minimise taxation, particularly with respect to operations
in developing countries).
AR 6. Impacts on affected communities that originate in the strategy or business model can also bring material risks to
the undertaking. For example, where the undertaking’s strategy involves moving into higher risk geographies in
pursuit of certain commodities, and if affected communities resist its presence or object to its local practices, this
may create extensive and costly delays, and affect the undertaking’s ability to secure future land concessions or
permits. Similarly, if the undertaking’s business model relies on intensive water extraction at its plants, to the
extent that it affects access to water for communities’ consumption, hygiene and livelihoods, this may result in
reputationally-damaging boycotts, complaints and lawsuits.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 225/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 7. Examples of particular characteristics of affected communities that may be considered by the undertaking when
responding to paragraph 10 may be an affected community that is physically or economically isolated and is
particularly susceptible to introduced diseases or has limited access to social services and therefore relies on
infrastructure set up by the undertaking. It may be because where land worked by women is purchased by the
undertaking and payments go to male heads of households, women become further disenfranchised in the
community. It may also be because the community is indigenous, and its members seek to exercise cultural or
economic rights to the land owned or used by the undertaking – or by one of the entities with which it has a
business relationship – in a context where their rights are not protected by the state. In addition, the undertaking
shall consider whether different characteristics overlap. For example, characteristics such as ethnicity,
socioeconomic status, migrant status and gender may create overlapping risks of harm for certain affected
communities, or for distinct parts of those affected communities, since affected communities are often
heterogeneous in nature.
AR 8. With regard to paragraph 11, material risks could also arise because of the undertaking’s dependency on affected
communities where low likelihood but high impact events may trigger financial effects; for example, where a
natural disaster leads to a catastrophic industrial accident involving the undertaking’s operations, resulting in
severe harm to affected communities.
Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure Requirement S3-1 – Policies related to affected communities
AR 9. The description shall include the key information necessary to ensure a faithful representation of the policies in
relation to affected communities and, therefore, the undertaking shall consider explanations of significant
changes to the policies adopted during the reporting year (for example, new or additional approaches to
engagement, due diligence and remedy).
AR 10. When disclosing the alignment of its policies with the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, the
undertaking shall consider that the Guiding Principles refer to the International Bill of Rights, which consists of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the two Covenants that implement it, as well as the UN
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, the International Labour Organisation’s Convention concerning
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples (ILO No. 169) and the core conventions that underpin it, and may disclose its
alignment with these instruments.
AR 11. The undertaking may provide an illustration of the types of communication of its policies to those individuals,
group of individuals or entities for whom they are relevant, either because they are expected to implement them
(for example, the undertaking’s employees, contractors and suppliers), or because they have a direct interest in
their implementation (for example, own workers, investors). It may disclose communication tools and channels
(for example, flyers, newsletters, dedicated websites, social media, face to face interactions, workers’
representatives), aimed at ensuring that the policy is accessible and that different audiences understand its
implications. The undertaking may also explain how it identifies and removes potential barriers for dissemination,
such as through translation into relevant languages or the use of graphic depictions.
AR 12. When disclosing severe human rights issues and incidents connected to affected communities, the undertaking
shall consider any legal disputes related to land rights and to the free, prior and informed consent of indigenous
peoples.
Disclosure Requirement S3-2 – Processes for engaging with affected communities about impacts
AR 13. Explanations of how the undertaking takes into account and ensures respect of the right of indigenous peoples to
free, prior and informed consent may include information about processes to consult with indigenous peoples to
obtain such consent. The undertaking shall consider how the consultation includes a good faith negotiation with
affected indigenous peoples to obtain their free, prior and informed consent where the undertaking affects the
lands, territories or resources that indigenous peoples customarily own, occupy or otherwise use; or relocates
them from land or territories subject to traditional ownership or under customary use or occupation; or affects or
exploits their cultural, intellectual, religious and spiritual property.
226/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 14. When describing which function or role has operational responsibility for such engagement and/or ultimate
accountability, the undertaking may disclose whether this is a dedicated role or function or part of a broader role
or function, and whether any capacity building activities have been offered to support the staff to undertake
engagement. If it cannot identify such a position or function, it may state that this is the case. This disclosure
could also be fulfilled by making reference to information disclosed according to ESRS 2 GOV-1 The role of the
administrative, management and supervisory bodies.
AR 15. When preparing the disclosures described in paragraph 20 b) and c), the following illustrations may be considered:
(a) examples of stages at which engagement occurs are i) determining the approach to mitigation and ii) evaluating
the effectiveness of mitigation;
(b) for type of engagement, these could be participation, consultation and/or information;
(c) for the frequency of the engagement, information may be provided on whether engagement occurs on a
regular basis, at certain points in a project or business process; and
(d) for the role with operational responsibility, whether the undertaking requires relevant staff to have certain
skills, or whether it provides training or capacity building to relevant staff to undertake engagement. In the
case of material impacts, risks and opportunities related to indigenous peoples, this includes training on
indigenous people’s rights, including on free, prior and informed consent.
AR 16. To illustrate how the perspectives of communities have informed specific decisions or activities of the undertaking,
the undertaking may provide examples from the current reporting period.
Disclosure Requirement S3-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for affected communities to raise
concerns
AR 17. In fulfilling the requirements set out by Disclosure Requirement ESRS S3-3, the undertaking may be guided by the
content of the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights and the OECD Guidelines for Multinational
Enterprises focused on remediation and grievance mechanisms.
AR 18. Channels for raising concerns or needs, include grievance mechanisms, hotlines, dialogue processes or other
means through which affected communities or their legitimate representatives can raise concerns about impacts
or explain needs that they would like the undertaking to address. This could include channels provided by the
undertaking directly, in addition to any other mechanisms the undertaking may use to gain insight into the
management of impacts on communities, such as compliance audits. Where the undertaking is relying solely on
information about the existence of such channels provided by its business relationships to answer this
requirement, it may state that.
AR 19. To provide greater insight into the information covered in ESRS S3-3, the undertaking may explain whether and
how communities that may be affected are able to access channels at the level of the undertaking they are affected
by, in relation to each material impact. Relevant insights include information on whether affected communities
can access channels in a language they understand, and whether they have been consulted in the design of such
channels.
AR 20. Third party mechanisms could include those operated by the government, NGOs, industry associations and other
collaborative initiatives. The undertaking may disclose whether these are accessible to all affected communities
who may be potentially or actually materially impacted by the undertaking, or individuals or organisations acting
on their behalf or who are otherwise in a position to be aware of negative impacts.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 227/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 21. In relation to the protection of individuals that use the mechanisms against retaliation, the undertaking may
describe whether it treats grievances confidentially and with respect to the rights of privacy and data protection;
and whether to the mechanisms can be used anonymously (for example, through representation by a third party).
AR 22. When disclosing processes related to providing and enabling remedy for indigenous peoples, relevant information
includes whether and how the undertaking has considered their customs, traditions, rules and legal systems.
AR 23. In disclosing whether and how the undertaking knows that affected communities are aware of and trust any of
these channels, the undertaking may provide relevant and reliable data about the effectiveness of these channels
from the perspective of affected communities themselves. Examples of sources of information are surveys of
community members that have used such channels and their levels of satisfaction with the process and outcomes.
AR 24. In describing the effectiveness of channels for affected communities to raise concerns, the undertaking may be
guided by the following questions, based on the “effectiveness criteria for non- judicial grievance mechanisms”, as
laid out in the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, in particular Principle 31. The below
considerations may be applied on an individual channel basis or for the collective system of channels:
(a) do the channels hold legitimacy by providing appropriate accountability for their fair conduct and building
stakeholder trust?
(b) are the channels known and accessible to stakeholders?
(c) do the channels have clear and known procedures, set timeframes and clarity on the processes?
(d) do the channels ensure reasonable access to sources of information, advice and expertise?
(e) do the channels offer transparency by providing sufficient information both to complainants and, where
applicable, to meet any public interest at stake?
(f) do the outcomes achieved through the channels accord with internationally recognised human rights?
(g) does the undertaking identify insights from the channels that support continuous learning in both improving
the channels and preventing future impacts?
(h) does the undertaking focus on dialogue with complainants as the means to reach agreed solutions, rather than
seeking to unilaterally determine the outcome?
Disclosure Requirement S3-4 – Taking action on material impacts on affected communities, and approaches to
managing material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to affected communities, and effectiveness of
those actions
AR 25. It may take time to understand negative impacts and how the undertaking may be involved with them through its
value chain, as well as to identify appropriate responses and put them into practice. Therefore, the undertaking
shall consider:
(a) its general and specific approaches to addressing material negative impacts;
(b) its social investment or other development programmes aimed at contributing to additional material positive
impacts;
(c) how far it has progressed in its efforts during the reporting period; and
(d) its aims for continued improvement.
AR 26. Appropriate action can vary according to whether the undertaking causes or contributes to a material impact, or
whether the material impact is directly linked to its own operations, products or services through a business
relationship.
228/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 27. Given that material negative impacts affecting communities that have occurred during the reporting period may
also be linked to entities or operations outside its direct control, the undertaking may disclose whether and how it
seeks to use its leverage in its business relationships to manage those impacts. This may include using commercial
leverage (for example, enforcing contractual requirements with business relationships or implementing incentives),
other forms of leverage within the relationship (such as providing training or capacity-building on the rights of
indigenous peoples to entities with which the undertaking has a business relationships) or collaborative leverage
with peers or other actors (such as initiatives aimed at minimising security-related impacts on communities or
participating in company-community partnerships).
AR 28. Impacts on communities may stem from environmental matters which are disclosed by the undertaking under the
ESRS E1 to E5. Examples include:
(a) ESRS E1 Climate Change: The implementation of climate change mitigation plans may require the undertaking
to invest in renewable energy projects that may affect the lands, territories and natural resources of indigenous
peoples. If the undertaking does not consult with the affected indigenous peoples , it could negatively impact
the affected communities’ right to free, prior and informed consent;
(b) ESRS E2 Pollution: The undertaking may negatively impact affected communities by failing to protect them
from pollution from a particular production facility that causes them health-related issues;
(c) ESRS E3 Water and marine sources: The undertaking may negatively impact the access to clean drinking water of
communities when withdrawing water in water stressed areas;
(d) ESRS E4 Biodiversity and ecosystems: The undertaking may negatively affect the livelihood of local farmers
through operations that contaminate soil. Additional examples include the sealing of land through building
new infrastructure, which can eradicate plant species that are critical for, for example, local biodiversity or to
filter water for communities; or the introduction of invasive species (whether plants or animals) that can
impact ecosystems and cause subsequent harm;
(e) ESRS E5 Resource use and circular economy: The undertaking may negatively impact the lives of communities by
affecting their health through the mismanagement of hazardous waste.
Where the connection between environmental impacts and local communities is addressed in the disclosures within the
Disclosure Requirements ESRS E1-E5, the undertaking may cross-reference to those and clearly identify such disclosures.
AR 29. When the undertaking discloses its participation in an industry or multi-stakeholder initiative as part of its actions
to address material negative impacts, the undertaking may disclose how the initiative, and its own involvement, is
aiming to address the material impact concerned. It may disclose under ESRS S3-5 the relevant targets set by the
initiative and progress towards them.
AR 30. When disclosing whether and how the undertaking considers actual and potential impacts on affected
communities in decisions to terminate business relationships and whether and how it seeks to address any
negative impacts that may result from termination, the undertaking may include examples.
AR 31. In disclosing how it tracks the effectiveness of actions to manage material impacts during the reporting period, the
undertaking may disclose any lessons learned from the previous and current reporting periods.
AR 32. Processes used to track the effectiveness of actions can include internal or external auditing or verification, court
proceedings and/or related court decisions, impact assessments, measurement systems, stakeholder feedback,
grievance mechanisms, external performance ratings, and benchmarking.
AR 33. Reporting on effectiveness is aimed at enabling the understanding of the links between actions taken by an
undertaking and the effective management of impacts.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 229/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 34. With regard to initiatives or processes whose primary aim is to deliver positive impacts for affected communities
that are based on affected communities’ needs, and with regard to progress in the implementation of such
initiatives or processes, the undertaking may disclose:
(a) information about whether and how affected communities and legitimate representatives or their credible
proxies play a role in decisions regarding the design and implementation of these investments or
programmes; and
(b) information about the intended or achieved positive outcomes for affected communities of these investments
or programmes.
(c) an explanation of the approximate scope of affected communities covered by the described social investment
or development programmes, and, where applicable, the rationale for why selected communities were chosen
for a given social investment or development programme's implementation.
AR 35. The undertaking may disclose whether any initiatives or processes whose primary aim is to deliver positive
impacts for affected communities are designed also to support the achievement of one or more of the UN
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). For example, through a commitment to advance UN SDG 5 to “achieve
gender equality and empower all women and girls” the undertaking may be taking thoughtful measures to include
women in the consultation process with an affected community to meet standards of effective stakeholder
engagement, which can help empower the women in the process itself, but potentially also in their daily lives.
AR 36. When disclosing the intended or achieved positive outcomes of its actions for affected communities a distinction
is to be made between evidence of certain activities having occurred (for example, that x number of women
community members have been provided with training on how to become local suppliers to the undertaking)
from evidence of actual outcomes for affected communities (for example, that x women community members
have set up small businesses and have had their contracts with the undertaking renewed year-on-year).
AR 37. When disclosing whether initiatives or processes also play a role in mitigating material negative impacts, the
undertaking may for example consider programmes that aim to improve local infrastructure surrounding an
undertaking’s operations, such as improvements in roads leading to a reduction in the number of severe traffic
accidents involving community members.
AR 38. When disclosing the material risks and opportunities related to the undertaking’s impacts or dependencies on
affected communities, the undertaking may consider the following:
(a) risks related to the undertaking’s impacts on affected communities may include the reputational or legal
exposure, as well as operational risks, where affected communities protest against resettlements or the loss of
access to lands, leading to costly delays, boycotts, or lawsuits;
(b) risks related to the undertaking’s dependencies on affected communities may include disruption of business
operations where indigenous peoples decide to withdraw their consent to a project on their lands, forcing the
undertaking to significantly modify or abandon the project;
(c) business opportunities related to the undertaking’s impacts on affected communities may include more easily
financing projects and being a partner of choice for communities, governments and other businesses; and
(d) opportunities related to the undertaking’s dependencies on affected communities may include the
development of positive relationships between the undertaking and indigenous peoples that enable existing
projects to expand with strong support.
AR 39. In disclosing the information in AR 41, the undertaking may consider explanations of risks and opportunities
stemming from environmental impacts or dependencies (please refer to AR 31 for further details), including
related human rights (or social) impacts. Examples include reputational risks stemming from the impact on the
health of communities of unmanaged polluting discharges; or the financial effects of protests that may disrupt or
interrupt an undertaking’s activities, for example, in response to operations in water stressed areas that may impact
the lives of affected communities.
230/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 40. When disclosing whether dependencies turn into risks, the undertaking shall consider external developments.
AR 41. When disclosing policies, action and resources and targets related to the management of material risks and
opportunities, in cases where risks and opportunities arise from a material impact, the undertaking may cross-
reference its disclosures on policies, actions and resources and targets in relation to that impact.
AR 42. The undertaking shall consider whether and how its processes to manage material risks related to affected
communities are integrated into its existing risk management processes.
AR 43. When disclosing the resources allocated to the management of material impacts, the undertaking may disclose
which internal functions are involved in managing the impacts and what types of action they take to address
negative and advance positive impacts.
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement S3-5 – Targets related to managing material negative impacts, advancing positive impacts, and
managing material risks and opportunities
AR 44. When disclosing information about targets in accordance with paragraph 38, the undertaking may disclose:
(a) the intended outcomes to be achieved in the lives of affected communities, being as specific as possible;
(b) the stability of the targets over time in terms of definitions and methodologies to enable comparability over time;
(c) the standards or commitments which the targets are based on (for instance codes of conduct, sourcing policies, global
frameworks or industry codes).
AR 45. Targets related to material risks and opportunities may be the same as or distinct from targets related to material
impacts. For example, a target to fully restore livelihoods of affected communities following resettlement could
both reduce impacts on those communities and reduce associated risks such as community protests.
AR 46. The undertaking may also distinguish between short-, medium- and long-term targets covering the same policy
commitment. For example, the undertaking may have as a main objective to employ community members at a
local mining site, with the long-term goal of staffing 100% locally by 2025, and with the short-term objective of
adding x percent of local employees every year up and until 2025.
AR 47. When modifying or replacing a target in the reporting period, the undertaking may explain the change by linking it
to significant changes in the business model or to broader changes in the accepted standard or legislation from
which the target is derived to provide contextual information as per ESRS 2 BP-2 Disclosures in relation to specific
circumstances.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 231/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
ESRS S4
CONSUMERS AND END-USERS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Objective
Interaction with other ESRS
Disclosure Requirements
– ESRS 2 General Disclosures
Strategy
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-2 – Interests and views of stakeholders
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 – Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their
interaction with strategy and business mode
Impact, risk and opportunity management
— Disclosure Requirement S4-1 – Policies related to consumers and end-users
— Disclosure Requirement S4-2 – Processes for engaging with consumers and end-users about impacts
— Disclosure Requirement S4-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for consumers and
end-users to raise concerns
— Disclosure Requirement S4-4 – Taking action on material impacts on consumers and end-users, and
approaches to managing material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to consumers and end-
users, and effectiveness of those actions
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement S4-5 – Targets related to managing material negative impacts, advancing positive
impacts, and managing material risks and opportunities
Appendix A: Application Requirements
– Objective
– ESRS 2 General disclosures
Strategy
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-2 – Interests and views of stakeholders
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 – Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their
interaction with strategy and business model
Impact, risk and opportunity management
— Disclosure Requirement S4-1 – Policies related to consumers and end-users
— Disclosure Requirement S4-2 – Processes for engaging with consumers and end-users about impacts
— Disclosure Requirement S4-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for consumers and
end-users to raise concerns
— Disclosure Requirement S4-4 – Taking action on material impacts, and approaches to mitigating material
risks and pursuing material opportunities related to consumers and end-users and effectiveness of those
actions and approaches
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement S4-5 – Targets related to managing material negative impacts, advancing positive
impacts, and managing material risks and opportunities
232/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Objective
1. The objective of this Standard is to specify disclosure requirements which will enable users of the sustainability
statement to understand material impacts on consumers and end-users connected with the undertaking’s own
operations and value chain, including through its products or services, as well as through its business relationships,
and its related material risks and opportunities, including:
(a) how the undertaking affects the consumers and/or end-users of its products and/or services (referred to in this
Standard as “consumers and end-users”), in terms of material positive and negative actual or potential impacts;
(b) any actions taken, and the result of such actions, to prevent, mitigate or remediate actual or potential negative
impacts, and to address risks and opportunities;
(c) the nature, type and extent of the undertaking’s material risks and opportunities related to its impacts and
dependencies on consumers and end-users, and how the undertaking manages such risks and opportunities; and
(d) the financial effects on the undertaking over the short-, medium- and long-term of material risks and
opportunities arising from the undertaking’s impacts and dependencies on consumers and/or end-users.
2. In order to meet the objective, this Standard requires an explanation of the general approach the undertaking takes to
identify and manage any material actual and potential impacts on the consumers and/or end-users related to its
products and/or services in relation to:
(a) information-related impacts on consumers and/or end-users (for example, privacy, freedom of expression and
access to (quality) information;
(b) personal safety of consumers and/or end-users (for example, health and safety, security of a person and
protection of children);
(c) social inclusion of consumers and/or end-users (for example, non-discrimination, access to products and services
and responsible marketing practices).
3. This Standard also requires an explanation of how such impacts, as well as the undertaking’s dependencies on
consumers and/or end-users, can create material risks or opportunities for the undertaking. For example, negative
impacts on the reputation of the undertaking’s products and/or services can be detrimental to its business
performance, while trust in products and/or services can bring business benefits, such as increased sales or widening
of the future consumer base.
4. The unlawful use or misuse of the undertaking’s products and services by consumers and end-users fall outside the
scope of this standard.
Interaction with other ESRS
5. This standard applies when material impacts on and/or material risks and opportunities related to consumers and/or
end-users have been identified through the materiality assessment process laid out in ESRS 2 General disclosures.
6. This Standard shall be read in conjunction with ESRS 1 General requirements, and ESRS 2, as well as ESRS S1 Own
workforce, ESRS S2 Workers in the value chain and ESRS S3 Affected communities.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 233/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Disclosure Requirements
ESRS 2 General Disclosures
7. The requirements of this section should be read in conjunction with the disclosures required by ESRS 2 on Strategy
(SBM). The resulting disclosures shall be presented alongside the disclosures required by ESRS 2, except for SBM-3
Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and business model, for which the undertaking
has an option to present the disclosures alongside the topical disclosure.
Strategy
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-2 – Interests and views of stakeholders
8. When responding to ESRS 2 SBM-2, paragraph 43, the undertaking shall disclose how the interests, views and rights
of its consumers and/or end-users, including respect for their human rights, inform its strategy and business model.
Consumers and/or end-users are a key group of affected stakeholders.
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 – Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction
with strategy and business model
9. When responding to ESRS 2 SBM-3 paragraph 48, the undertaking shall disclose:
(a) whether and how actual and potential impacts on consumers and/or end-users as identified in Disclosure
Requirements ESRS 2 IRO-1 Description of the processes to identify and assess material impacts, risks and opportunities:
(i) originate from or are connected to the undertaking’s strategy and business model, and (ii) inform and
contribute to adapting the undertaking’s strategy and business model, and
(b) the relationship between its material risks and opportunities arising from impacts and dependencies on
consumers and/or end-users and its strategy and business model.
10. When fulfilling the requirements of paragraph 48, the undertaking shall disclose whether all consumers and/or end-
users who are likely to be materially impacted by the undertaking, including impacts connected with the
undertaking’s own operations and value chain, including through its products or services, as well as through its
business relationships, are included in the scope of its disclosure under ESRS 2. In addition, the undertaking shall
disclose the following information:
(a) a brief description of the types of consumers and/or end-users subject to material impacts by its own operations
or through its value chain, and specify whether they are:
i. consumers and/or end-users of products that are inherently harmful to people and/or increase risks for
chronic disease;
ii. consumers and/or end-users of services that potentially negatively impact their rights to privacy, to have their
personal data protected, to freedom of expression and to non- discrimination;
iii. consumers and/or end-users who are dependent on accurate and accessible product- or service- related
information, such as manuals and product labels, to avoid potentially damaging use of a product or service;
iv. consumers and/or end-users who are particularly vulnerable to health or privacy impacts or impacts from
marketing and sales strategies, such as children or financially vulnerable individuals;
(b) in the case of material negative impacts, whether they are either (i) widespread or systemic in contexts where the
undertaking sells or provides its products or services (for example, state surveillance that affects the privacy of
service users), or (ii) related to individual incidents (for example, a defect linked to a particular product) or to
specific business relationships (for example, a business partner uses marketing that inappropriately targets
young consumers);
234/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(c) in the case of material positive impacts, a brief description of the activities that result in the positive impacts (for
example, product design that improves its accessibility for persons with disabilities) and the types of
consumers and/or end-users that are positively affected or could be positively affected; the undertaking may also
disclose whether the positive impacts occur in specific countries or regions; and
(d) any material risks and opportunities for the business arising from impacts and dependencies on
consumers and/or end-users.
11. In describing the main types of consumers and/or end-users who are or could be negatively affected, based on the
materiality assessment set out in ESRS 2 IRO-1, the undertaking shall disclose whether and how it has developed an
understanding of how consumers and/or end-users with particular characteristics, or those using particular products
or services, may be at greater risk of harm.
12. The undertaking shall disclose which, if any, of its material risks and opportunities arising from impacts and
dependencies on consumers and/or end-users, relate to specific groups of consumers and/or end-users (for example,
particular age groups) rather than to all consumers and/or end-users.
Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure Requirement S4-1 – Policies related to consumers and end-users
13. The undertaking shall describe its policies adopted to manage its material impacts of its products and/or
services on consumers and end-users, as well as associated material risks and opportunities.
14. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the extent to which the undertaking
has policies that address the identification, assessment, management and/or remediation of material impacts on
consumers and/or end-users specifically, as well as policies that cover material risks or opportunities related to
consumers and/or end-users.
15. The disclosure required by paragraph 13 shall contain the information on the undertaking’s policies to manage its
material impacts, risks and opportunities related to consumers and/or end-users in accordance with ESRS 2 MDR-P
Policies adopted to manage material sustainability matters. In addition, the undertaking shall specify if such policies cover
specific groups or all consumers and/or end-users.
16. The undertaking shall describe its human rights policy commitments(116)that are relevant to consumers and/or end-
users, including those processes and mechanisms to monitor compliance with the UN Guiding Principles on Business
and Human Rights, ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work or OECD Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises. In its disclosure it shall focus on those matters that are material, as well as the general
approach in relation to(117):
(a) respect for the human rights of consumers and/or end-users;
(b) engagement with consumers and/or end-users; and
(c) measures to provide and/or enable remedy for human rights impacts.
17. The undertaking shall disclose whether and how its policies with regard to consumers and/or end-users are aligned
with internationally recognised instruments relevant to consumers and/or end-users, including United Nations (UN)
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. The undertaking shall also disclose the extent to which cases of
non-respect of the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, ILO Declaration on Fundamental
(116) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #9 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Lack of a human
rights policy”).
(117) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from a mandatory indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #11 in Table I of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 235/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Principles and Rights at Work or OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises that involve consumers and/or end-
users have been reported in its downstream value chain and, if applicable, an indication of the nature of such
cases(118).
Disclosure Requirement S4-2 – Processes for engaging with consumers and end-users about impacts
18. The undertaking shall disclose its general processes for engaging with consumers and end-users and their
representatives about actual and potential impacts on them.
19. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of whether and how the undertaking
engages, as part of its ongoing due diligence process, with consumers and/or end-users, their legitimate
representatives, or with credible proxies, about material actual and potential positive and/or negative impacts that
do or are likely to affect them, and whether and how perspectives of consumers and/or end-users are taken into
account in the decision-making processes of the undertaking.
20. The undertaking shall disclose whether and how the perspectives of consumers and/or end-users inform its decisions
or activities aimed at managing actual and potential impacts on consumers and/or end-users. This shall include,
where relevant, an explanation of:
(a) whether engagement occurs with affected consumers and/or end-users or their legitimate representatives
directly, or with credible proxies that have insight into their situation;
(b) the stage(s) at which engagement occurs, the type of engagement, and the frequency of the engagement;
(c) the function and the most senior role within the undertaking that has operational responsibility for ensuring this
engagement happens and that the results inform the undertaking’s approach; and
(d) where applicable, how the undertaking assesses the effectiveness of its engagement with consumers and/or end-
users, and, where relevant, any agreements or outcomes that result from such engagement.
21. Where applicable, the undertaking shall disclose the steps it takes to gain insight into the perspectives of consumers
and/or end-users that may be particularly vulnerable to impacts and/or marginalised (for example, people with
disabilities, children, etc.).
22. If the undertaking cannot disclose the above required information because it has not adopted a general process to
engage with consumers and/or end-users, it shall disclose this to be the case. It may disclose a timeframe in which it
aims to have such a process in place.
Disclosure Requirement S4-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for consumers and end-users to
raise concerns
23. The undertaking shall describe the processes it has in place to provide for or cooperate in the remediation
of negative impacts on consumers and end-users that the undertaking is connected with, as well as
channels available to consumers and end-users to raise concerns and have them addressed.
(118) This information supports the information needs of: financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from a mandatory indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #10 in Table I of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Violations of UN
Global Compact principles and Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Guidelines for Multinational
Enterprises”); and benchmark administrators to disclose ESG factors subject to Regulation (EU) 2020/1816 as set out by indicator
“Number of benchmark constituents subject to social violations (absolute number and relative divided by all benchmark
constituents), as referred to in international treaties and conventions, United Nations principles and, where applicable, national law”
in section 1 and 2 of Annex II.
236/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
24. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the formal means by which consumers
and/or end-users can make their concerns and needs known directly to the undertaking, and/or through which the
undertaking supports the availability of such channels (for example, grievance mechanisms) by its business
relationships, how follow up is performed with these consumers and/or end-users regarding the issues raised, and
the effectiveness of these channels.
25. The undertaking shall describe:
(a) its general approach to and processes for providing or contributing to remedy where it has identified that it has
caused or contributed to a material negative impact on consumers and/or end-users, including whether and
how the undertaking assesses that the remedy provided is effective;
(b) any specific channels it has in place for consumers and/or end-users to raise their concerns or needs directly with
the undertaking and have them addressed, including whether these are established by the undertaking
itself and/or through participation in third-party mechanisms;
(c) the processes through which the undertaking supports or requires the availability of such channels by its business
relationships; and
(d) how it tracks and monitors issues raised and addressed, and how it ensures the effectiveness of the channels,
including through involvement of stakeholders who are the intended users.
26. The undertaking shall disclose whether and how it assesses that consumers and/or end-users are aware of and trust
these structures or processes as a way to raise their concerns or needs and have them addressed. In addition, the
undertaking shall disclose whether it has policies in place to protect individuals from retaliation when they use such
structures or processes. If such information has been disclosed in accordance with ESRS G1-1, the undertaking may
refer to that information.
27. If the undertaking cannot disclose the above required information because it has not adopted a channel for raising
concerns and/or does not support the availability of mechanisms by its business relationships, it shall disclose this to
be the case. It may disclose a timeframe in which it aims to have such a channel or processes in place.
Disclosure Requirement S4-4 – Taking action on material impacts on consumers and end- users, and approaches to
managing material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to consumers and end-users, and effectiveness of
those actions
28. The undertaking shall disclose how it takes action to address material impacts on consumers and end-users,
and to manage material risks and pursue material opportunities related to consumers and end-users, and
effectiveness of those actions.
29. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is twofold. Firstly, it is to provide an understanding of any actions and
initiatives through which the undertaking seeks to:
(a) prevent, mitigate and remediate the negative material impacts on consumers and/or end-users, and/or
(b) achieve positive material impacts for consumers and/or end-users.
Secondly, it is to enable an understanding of the ways in which the undertaking is addressing the material risks and
pursuing the material opportunities related to consumers and/or end-users.
30. The undertaking shall provide a summarised description of the action plans and resources to manage its material
impacts, risks, and opportunities related to consumers and end-users as per ESRS 2 MDR-A Actions and resources in
relation to material sustainability matters.
31. In relation to material impacts, the undertaking shall describe:
(a) actions taken, planned or underway to prevent, mitigate or remediate material negative impacts on consumers
and/or end-users;
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 237/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) whether and how it has taken action to provide or enable remedy in relation to an actual material impact;
(c) any additional actions or initiatives it has in place with the primary purpose of positively contributing to
improved social outcomes for consumers and/or end-users; and
(d) how it tracks and assesses the effectiveness of these actions and initiatives in delivering intended outcomes for
consumers and/or end-users.
32. In relation to paragraph 28, the undertaking shall describe:
(a) the processes through which it identifies what action is needed and appropriate in response to a particular actual
or potential negative impact on consumers and/or end-users;
(b) its approaches to taking action in relation to specific material negative impacts on consumers and/or end-users,
including any action in relation to its own practices regarding product design, marketing or sales, as well as
whether wider industry or collaborative action with other relevant parties will be required; and
(c) how it ensures that processes to provide or enable remedy in the event of material negative impacts are available
and effective in their implementation and outcomes.
33. In relation to material risks and opportunities, the undertaking shall describe:
(a) what action is planned or underway to mitigate material risks for the undertaking arising from its impacts and
dependencies on consumers and/or end-users and how it tracks effectiveness in practice; and
(b) what action is planned or underway to pursue material opportunities for the undertaking in relation to
consumers and/or end-users.
34. The undertaking shall disclose whether and how it takes action to avoid causing or contributing to material negative
impacts on consumers and/or end-users through its own practices, including, where relevant, in relation to
marketing, sales and data use. This may include disclosing what approach is taken when tensions arise between the
prevention or mitigation of material negative impacts and other business pressures.
35. When preparing this disclosure, the undertaking shall consider whether severe human rights issues and incidents
connected to its consumers and/or end-users have been reported and, if applicable, disclose these(119).
36. Where the undertaking evaluates the effectiveness of an action by setting a target, in disclosing the information
required under paragraph 32 (c), the undertaking shall consider ESRS 2 MDR-T Tracking effectiveness of policies and
actions through targets.
37. The undertaking shall disclose what resources are allocated to the management of its material impacts with
information that enables users to gain an understanding of how the material impacts are managed.
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement S4-5 – Targets related to managing material negative impacts, advancing positive impacts, and
managing material risks and opportunities
38. The undertaking shall disclose the time-bound and outcome-oriented targets it may have set related to:
(a) reducing negative impacts on consumers and/or end-users; and/or
(b) advancing positive impacts on consumers and/or end-users; and/or
(c) managing material risks and opportunities related to consumers and/or end-users.
(119) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #14 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments (“Number of
identified cases of severe human rights issues and incidents”).
238/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
39. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the extent to which the undertaking is
using time-bound and outcome-oriented targets to drive and measure progress in addressing material negative
impacts, and/or advancing positive impacts on consumers and/or end-users, and/or in managing material risks and
opportunities related to consumers and/or end-users .
40. The summarised description of the targets to manage its material impacts, risks and opportunities related to
consumers and/or end-users shall contain the information requirements defined in ESRS 2 MDR-T.
41. The undertaking shall disclose the process for setting the targets, including whether and how the undertaking
engaged directly with consumers and/or end-users, their legitimate representatives, or with credible proxies that
have insight into their situation in:
(a) setting any such targets;
(b) tracking the undertaking’s performance against them; and
(c) identifying, if any, lessons or improvements as a result of the undertaking’s performance.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 239/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix A
Application Requirements
This appendix is an integral part of the ESRS S4 Consumers and end-users. It supports the application of the requirements set
out in this standard and has the same authority as the other parts of the standard.
Objective
AR 1. The undertaking may highlight special issues relevant to a material impact for a shorter period of time, for instance
initiatives regarding the health and safety of consumers and/or end-users in relation to contamination of a product
or severe breach of privacy due to a massive data leak.
AR 2. The overview of social and human rights matters provided in paragraph 2 is not meant to imply that all of these
issues should be disclosed in each Disclosure Requirement in this Standard. Rather, it provides a list of matters
that the undertaking shall consider in its materiality assessment (ref. to ESRS 1 chapter 3 Double materiality as the
basis for sustainability disclosures and ESRS 2 IRO-1) related to consumers and/or end-users and, subsequently,
disclose as material impacts, risks and opportunities within the scope of this Standard.
ESRS 2 General disclosures
Strategy
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-2 – Interests and views of stakeholders
AR 3. ESRS 2 SBM-2 requires the undertaking to provide an understanding of if and how it considers whether its strategy
and business model play a role in creating, exacerbating or (conversely) mitigating significant material impacts on
consumers and/or end-users, and whether and how the business model and strategy are adapted to address such
material impacts.
AR 4. While consumers and/or end-users may not be engaging with the undertaking at the level of its strategy or
business model, their views can inform the undertaking’s assessment of its strategy and business model. The
undertaking may disclose the views of the (actual or potential) materially affected consumers and/or end-users’
legitimate representatives or those of credible proxies that have insight into their situation.
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 – Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction
with strategy and business model
AR 5. Impacts on consumers and/or end-users can originate in the undertaking’s business model or strategy in a number
of different ways. For example, impacts may relate to the undertaking’s value proposition (for example, providing
online platforms with potential for online and offline harm), its value chain (for example, speed in developing
products or services, or delivering projects, with risks to health and safety), or its cost structure and the revenue
model (for example, sales-maximising incentives that put consumers at risk).
AR 6. Impacts on consumers and/or end-users that originate in the strategy or business model can also bring material
risks to the undertaking. For example, if the undertaking’s business model is premised on incentivising its sales
force to sell high volumes of a product or service (for example, credit cards or pain medicine) at speed, and this
results in large- scale harm to consumers, the undertaking may face lawsuits and reputational damage affecting its
future business and credibility.
AR 7. Examples of particular characteristics of consumers and/or end-users that may be considered by the undertaking
when responding to paragraph 11 include young consumers and/or end-users who may be more susceptible to
impacts on their physical and mental development, or who lack financial literacy and may be more susceptible to
exploitative sales or marketing practices. They may also include women in a context where women are routinely
discriminated against in their access to particular services or in the marketing of particular products.
240/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 8. With regard to paragraph 12, the risks could arise because of the undertaking’s dependency on consumers and/or
end-users where low likelihood but high impact events may trigger financial effects, for example, where a global
pandemic leads to severe impacts on certain consumers’ livelihoods resulting in major changes in patterns of
consumption.
Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure Requirement S4-1 – Policies related to consumers and end-users
AR 9. The description shall include the key information necessary to ensure a faithful representation of the policies in
relation to consumers and end-users, and therefore, the undertaking shall consider explanations of significant
changes to the policies adopted during the reporting year (for example, new expectations for business customers,
new or additional approaches to due diligence and remedy).
AR 10. The policy may take the form of a stand-alone policy regarding consumers and/or end-users or be included in a
broader document such as a code of ethics or a general sustainability policy that has already been disclosed by the
undertaking as part of another ESRS. In those cases, the undertaking shall provide an accurate cross-reference to
identify the aspects of the policy that satisfy the requirements of this Disclosure Requirement.
AR 11. In disclosing its alignment of its policies with the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, the
undertaking shall consider that the Guiding Principles refer to the International Bill of Human Rights, which
consists of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the two Covenants that implement it, and may disclose
its alignment with these instruments.
AR 12. When disclosing how external facing policies are embedded, the undertaking may, for example, consider internal-
facing sales and distribution policies and alignment with other policies relevant to consumers and/or end-users.
The undertaking shall also consider its policies for safeguarding the veracity and usefulness of information
provided to potential and actual consumers and/or end-users, both before and after sale.
AR 13. The undertaking may provide an illustration of the types of communication of its policies to those individuals,
group of individuals or entities for whom they are relevant, either because they are expected to implement them
(for example, the undertaking’s employees, contractors and suppliers), or because they have a direct interest in
their implementation (for example, own workers, investors). It may disclose communication tools and channels
(for example, flyers, newsletters, dedicated websites, social media, face to face interactions, workers’
representatives), aimed at ensuring that the policy is accessible and that different audiences understand its
implications. The undertaking may also explain how it identifies and removes potential barriers for dissemination,
such as through translation into relevant languages or the use of graphic depictions.
Disclosure Requirement S4-2 – Processes for engaging with consumers and end-users about impacts
AR 14. Credible proxies who have knowledge of the interests, experiences or perspectives of consumers and end-users
could include national consumer protection bodies for some consumers.
AR 15. When describing which function or role has operational responsibility for such engagement and/or ultimate
accountability, the undertaking may disclose whether this is a dedicated role or function or part of a broader role
or function, and whether any capacity building activities have been offered to support the staff to undertake
engagement. If it cannot identify such a position or function, it may state that this is the case. This disclosure
could also be fulfilled by making reference to information disclosed according to ESRS 2 GOV-1 The role of the
administrative, management and supervisory bodies.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 241/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 16. When preparing the disclosures described in paragraph 20 b) and c), the following illustrations may be considered:
(a) for stage(s) at which engagement occurs, examples could be in determining mitigation approaches or in
evaluating their effectiveness;
(b) for type of engagement, these could be participation, consultation and/or information;
(c) for the frequency of the engagement, information may be provided on whether engagement occurs on a
regular basis, at certain points in a project or business process, as well as whether it occurs in response to legal
requirements and/or in response to stakeholder requests and whether the result of the engagement is being
integrated into the undertaking's decision-making processes; and
(d) for the role with operational responsibility, whether the undertaking requires relevant staff to have certain
skills, or whether it provides training or capacity building to relevant staff to undertake engagement.
AR 17. To illustrate how the perspectives of consumers and/or end-users have informed specific decisions or activities of
the undertaking, the undertaking may provide examples from the current reporting period.
Disclosure Requirement S4-3 – Processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for consumers and end-users to
raise concerns
AR 18. In fulfilling the requirements set out by the disclosure criteria of ESRS S4-3, the undertaking may be guided by the
content of the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights and the OECD Guidelines for Multinational
Enterprises focused on remediation and grievance mechanisms.
AR 19. Channels for raising concerns or needs, include grievance mechanisms, hotlines, dialogue processes or other
means through which consumers and/or end-users or their legitimate representatives can raise concerns about
impacts or explain needs that they would like the undertaking to address. This could include channels provided by
the undertaking directly and is to be disclosed in addition to any other mechanisms the undertaking may use to
gain insight into the management of impacts on consumers and/or end-users, such as compliance audits. Where
the undertaking is relying solely on information about the existence of such channels provided by its business
relationships to answer this requirement, it may state that.
AR 20. To provide greater insight into the information covered in ESRS S4-3, the undertaking may provide insight into
whether and how consumers and/or end-users that may be affected are able to access channels at the level of the
undertaking they are affected by, in relation to each material impact.
AR 21. Third party mechanisms could include those operated by the government, NGOs, industry associations and other
collaborative initiatives. With regard to the scope of these mechanisms, the undertaking may disclose whether
these are accessible to all consumers and/or end-users who may be potentially or actually materially impacted by
the undertaking, or individuals or organisations acting on their behalf or who are otherwise in a position to be
aware of negative impacts, and through which consumers and/or end-users (or individuals or organisations acting
on their behalf or who are otherwise in a position to be aware of negative impacts), can raise complaints or
concerns related to the undertaking’s own activities.
AR 22. In relation to the protection of individuals that use the mechanisms against the retaliation, the undertaking may
describe whether it treats grievances confidentially and with respect to the rights of privacy and data protection;
and whether they allow for consumer and/or end-users to use them anonymously (for example, through
representation by a third party).
AR 23. In disclosing whether and how the undertaking knows that consumers and/or end-users are aware of and trust any
of these channels, the undertaking may provide relevant and reliable data about the effectiveness of these channels
from the perspective of consumers and/or end-users themselves. Examples of sources of information are surveys of
242/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
consumers and/or end-users that have used such channels and their levels of satisfaction with the process and
outcomes. To illustrate the usage level of such channels, the undertaking may disclose the number of complaints
received from consumers and/or end-users during the reporting period.
AR 24. In describing the effectiveness of channels for consumers and/or end-users to raise concerns, the undertaking may
be guided by the following questions, based on the “effectiveness criteria for nonjudicial grievance mechanisms”,
as laid out in the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. The below considerations may be applied
on an individual channel basis or for the collective system of channels:
(a) do the channels hold legitimacy by providing appropriate accountability for their fair conduct and building
stakeholder trust?
(b) are the channels known and accessible to stakeholders?
(c) do the channels have known procedures, set timeframes and clarity on the processes?
(d) do the channels ensure reasonable access to sources of information, advice and expertise?
(e) do the channels offer transparency by providing sufficient information both to complainants and where
applicable, to meet any public interest at stake?
(f) do the outcomes achieved from the channels accord with internationally recognised human rights?
(g) does the undertaking identify insights from the channels that support continuous learning in both improving
the channels and preventing future impacts?
(h) does the undertaking focus on dialogue with complainants as the means to reach agreed solutions, rather than
seeking to unilaterally determine the outcome?
For more information, see Principle 31 of the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.
Disclosure Requirement S4-4 – Taking action on material impacts on consumers and end- users, and approaches to
managing material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to consumers and end-users, and effectiveness of
those actions
AR 25. It may take time to understand negative impacts and how the undertaking may be involved with them through its
downstream value chain, as well as to identify appropriate responses and put them into practice). Therefore, the
undertaking shall consider:
(a) Its general and specific approaches to addressing material negative impacts;
(b) its initiatives aimed at contributing to additional material positive impacts;
(c) how far it has progressed in its efforts during the reporting period; and
(d) its aims for continued improvement.
AR 26. Appropriate action can vary according to whether the undertaking causes or contributes to a material impact, or
whether the material impact is directly linked to its own operations, products or services through a business
relationship.
AR 27. Given that material negative impacts affecting consumers and/or end-users that have occurred during the
reporting period may also be linked to entities or operations outside its direct control, the undertaking may
disclose whether and how it seeks to use leverage with relevant business relationships to manage those impacts.
This may include using commercial leverage (for example, enforcing contractual requirements with business
relationships or implementing incentives), other forms of leverage within the relationship (such as providing
training or capacity-building on proper product use or sale practices to business relationships) or collaborative
leverage with peers or other actors (such as initiatives aimed at responsible marketing or product safety).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 243/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 28. When the undertaking discloses its participation in an industry or multi-stakeholder initiative as part of its actions
to address material negative impacts, the undertaking may disclose how the initiative, and its own involvement, is
aiming to address the material impact concerned. It may disclose under ESRS S4-5 the relevant targets set by the
initiative and progress towards them.
AR 29. When disclosing whether and how it considers actual and potential impacts on consumers and/or end-users in
decisions to terminate business relationships and whether and how it seeks to address any negative impacts that
may result from termination, the undertaking may include examples.
AR 30. In disclosing how it tracks the effectiveness of actions to manage material impacts during the reporting period, the
undertaking may disclose any lessons learned from the previous and current reporting periods.
AR 31. Processes used to track the effectiveness of actions can include internal or external auditing or verification, court
proceedings and/or related court decisions, impact assessments, measurement systems, stakeholder feedback,
grievance mechanisms, external performance ratings, and benchmarking.
AR 32. Reporting on effectiveness is aimed at enabling the understanding of the links between actions taken by the
undertaking and the effective management of impacts.
AR 33. With regard to initiatives or processes the undertaking has in place that are based on affected consumers and/or
end-users’ needs and their level of implementation, the undertaking may disclose:
(a) information about whether and how consumers and/or end-users and legitimate representatives or their
credible proxies play a role in decisions regarding the design and implementation of these programmes or
processes; and
(b) information about the intended or achieved positive outcomes for consumers and/or end- users of these
programmes or processes.
AR 34. The undertaking may disclose whether any initiatives or processes whose primary aim is to deliver positive
impacts for consumers and/or end-users are designed to also support the achievement of one or more of the UN
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). For example, through a commitment to advance UN SDG 3 to “ensure
healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages” the undertaking may be actively working to make its
products less addictive and harmful to physical and psychological health.
AR 35. When disclosing the intended positive outcomes of its actions for consumers and/or end-users a distinction is to
be made between evidence of certain activities having occurred (for example, that x number of consumers have
received information about healthy eating habits) from evidence of actual outcomes for consumers and/or end-
users (for example, that x number of consumers have adopted healthier eating habits).
AR 36. When disclosing whether initiatives or processes also play a role in mitigating material negative impacts, the
undertaking may, for example, consider programmes that aim to support heightened awareness of the risk of
online scams, leading to a reduction in the number of cases of end-users experiencing breaches of data privacy.
AR 37. When disclosing the material risks and opportunities related to the undertaking’s impacts or dependencies on
consumers and/or end-users, the undertaking may consider the following:
(a) risks related to the undertaking’s impacts on consumers and/or end-users may include reputational or legal
exposure where poorly designed or defective products result in injuries or deaths;
(b) risks related to the undertaking’s dependencies on consumers and/or end-users may include the loss of
business continuity where an economic crisis makes consumers unable to afford certain products or services;
244/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(c) business opportunities related to the undertaking’s impacts on consumers and/or end- users may include
market differentiation and greater customer appeal from offering safe products or privacy-respecting services;
and
(d) business opportunities related to the undertaking’s dependencies on consumers and/or end-users may include
the achievement of a loyal future consumer base by ensuring, for example, that LGBTQI people are respected
and that the undertaking’s selling practices do not exclude such people from the products or services it offers.
AR 38. When disclosing whether dependencies turn into risks, the undertaking shall consider external developments.
AR 39. When disclosing policies, action and resources and targets related to the management of material risks and
opportunities, in cases where risks and opportunities arise from a material impact, the undertaking may cross-
reference its disclosures on policies, action and resources and targets in relation to that impact.
AR 40. The undertaking shall consider the extent to which its processes to manage material risks related to consumers
and/or end-users are integrated into its existing risk management processes and how.
AR 41. When disclosing the resources allocated to the management of material impacts, the undertaking may disclose
which internal functions are involved in managing the impacts and what types of action they take to address
negative and advance positive impacts.
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement S4-5 – Targets related to managing material negative impacts, advancing positive impacts, and
managing material risks and opportunities
AR 42. When disclosing targets in relation to consumers and/or end-users, the undertaking may disclose:
(a) the intended outcomes to be achieved in the lives of consumers and/or end-users, being as specific as possible;
(b) their stability over time in terms of definitions and methodologies to enable comparability; and/or
(c) references standards or commitments on which the targets are based are to be clearly defined in the reporting
(for instance codes of conduct, sourcing policies, global frameworks or industry codes).
AR 43. Targets related to material risks and opportunities may be the same as or distinct from targets tied to material
impacts. For example, a target to ensure equal access to finance for underserved consumers could both reduce
discrimination impacts on those consumers and enlarge the undertaking’s pool of customers.
AR 44. The undertaking may also distinguish between short, medium and long-term targets covering the same policy
commitment. For example, the undertaking may have as a main objective to make its online services accessible to
people with disabilities, with the long-term goal of having adapted 100% of its online services by 2025, and with
the short-term objective of adding x number of accessible features every year up and until 2025.
AR 45. When modifying or replacing a target in the reporting period, the undertaking may explain the change by cross-
referencing it to significant changes in the business model or to broader changes in the accepted standard or
legislation from which the target is derived to provide contextual information as per ESRS 2 BP-2 Disclosures in
relation to specific circumstances.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 245/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
ESRS G1
BUSINESS CONDUCT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Objective
Interaction with other ESRS
Disclosure Requirements
– ESRS 2 General disclosures
Governance
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 GOV-1 – The role of the administrative, supervisory and
management bodies
Impact, risk and opportunity management
— Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify and assess
material impacts, risks and opportunities
— Disclosure Requirement G1-1– Corporate culture and bBusiness conduct policies and corporate culture
— Disclosure Requirement G1-2 – Management of relationships with suppliers
— Disclosure Requirement G1-3 – Prevention and detection of corruption and bribery
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement G1-4 – Confirmed incidents of corruption or bribery
— Disclosure Requirement G1-5 – Political influence and lobbying activities
— Disclosure Requirement G1-6 – Payment practices
Appendix A: Application Requirements
Impact, risk and opportunity management
— Disclosure Requirement G1-1 – Corporate culture and business conduct policies
— Disclosure Requirement G1-2 – Management of relationships with suppliers
— Disclosure Requirement G1-3 – Prevention and detection of corruption and bribery
Metrics and targets
— Disclosure Requirement G1-5 – Political influence and lobbying activities
— Disclosure Requirement G1-6 – Payment practices
Objective
1. The objective of this Standard is to specify disclosure requirements which will enable users of the undertaking’s
sustainability statements to understand the undertaking’s strategy and approach, processes and procedures as well
as its performance in respect of business conduct.
2. This Standard focusses on the following matters, collectively referred to in this Standard as ‘business conduct or
business conduct matters’:
(a) business ethics and corporate culture, including anti-corruption and anti-bribery, the protection of
whistleblowers, and animal welfare;
(b) the management of relationships with suppliers, including payment practices, especially with regard to late
payment to small and medium-sized undertakings.
(c) activities and commitments of the undertaking related to exerting its political influence, including its lobbying
activities;
246/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Interaction with other ESRS
3. The content of this Standard on general disclosures as well as impact, risk and opportunity management and metrics
and targets shall be read in conjunction respectively with ESRS 1 General principles and ESRS 2 General requirements.
Disclosure Requirements
ESRS 2 General disclosures
4. The requirements of this section should be read in conjunction with and reported alongside the disclosures required
by ESRS 2 on Governance (GOV), Strategy (SBM) and Management of impacts, risks and opportunities (IRO).
Governance
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 GOV-1 – The role of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies
5. When disclosing information about the role of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies, the
undertaking shall cover the following aspects:
(a) the role of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies related to business conduct; and
(b) the expertise of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies on business conduct matters.
Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify and assess material impacts,
risks and opportunities
6. When describing the process to identify material impacts, risks and opportunities in relation to business conduct
matters, the undertaking shall disclose all relevant criteria used in the process, including location, activity, sector and
the structure of the transaction.
Disclosure Requirement G1-1– Business conduct policies and corporate culture
7. The undertaking shall disclose its policies with respect to business conduct matters and how it fosters its corporate
culture.
8. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to enable an understanding of the extent to which the undertaking
has policies that address the identification, assessment, management and/or remediation of its material impacts,
risks and opportunities related to business conduct matters. It also aims to provide an understanding of the
undertaking’s approach to corporate culture.
9. The disclosures required under paragraph 7 shall include how the undertaking establishes, develops, promotes and
evaluates its corporate culture.
10. The disclosures in paragraph 7 shall cover the following aspects related to the undertaking’s policies on business
conduct matters:
(a) a description of the mechanisms for identifying, reporting and investigating concerns about unlawful behaviour
or behaviour in contradiction of its code of conduct or similar internal rules; and whether it accommodates
reporting from internal and/or external stakeholders;
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 247/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) where the undertaking has no policies on anti-corruption or anti-bribery consistent with the United Nations
Convention against Corruption(120), it shall state this and whether it has plans to implement them and the
timetable for implementation;
(c) how the undertaking protects whistleblowers, including:
i. details on the establishment of internal whistleblower reporting channels, including whether the undertaking
provides for information and training to its own workers and information about the designation and training
of staff receiving reports; and
ii. measures to protect against retaliation its own workers who are whistleblowers in accordance with the
applicable law transposing Directive (EU) 2019/1937 of the European Parliament and of the Council(121);
(d) where the undertaking has no policies on the protection of whistle-blowers(122), it shall state this and whether it
has plans to implement them and the timetable for implementation;
(e) beyond the procedures to follow-up on reports by whistleblowers in accordance with the applicable law
transposing Directive (EU) 2019/1937, whether the undertaking has procedures to investigate business conduct
incidents, including incidents of corruption and bribery, promptly, independently and objectively;
(f) where applicable, whether the undertaking has in place policies with respect to animal welfare;
(g) the undertaking’s policy for training within the organisation on business conduct, including target audience,
frequency and depth of coverage; and
(h) the functions within the undertaking that are most at risk in respect of corruption and bribery.
11. Undertakings that are subject to legal requirements under national law transposing Directive (EU) 2019/1937, or to
equivalent legal requirements with regard to the protection of whistle-blowers, may comply with the disclosure
specified in paragraph 10 (d) by stating that they are subject to those legal requirements.
Disclosure Requirement G1-2 – Management of relationships with suppliers
12. The undertaking shall provide information about the management of its relationships with its suppliers and its
impacts on its supply chain.
13. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of the undertaking’s management of its
procurement process including fair behaviour with suppliers.
14. The undertaking shall provide a description of its policy to prevent late payments, specifically to SMEs.
15. The disclosure required under paragraph 12 shall include the following information:
(a) the undertaking’s approach to its relationships with its suppliers, taking account of risks to the undertaking
related to its supply chain and of impacts on sustainability matters; and
(b) whether and how it takes into account social and environmental criteria for the selection of its suppliers.
(120) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #15 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosures rules on sustainable investments (“Lack of anti-
corruption and anti-bribery policies”).
(121) Directive (EU) 2019/1937 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2019 on the protection of persons who
report breaches of Union law (OJ L 305, 26.11.2019, p. 17).
(122) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts as set out by indicator #6 in Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosures rules on sustainable investments (“Insufficient
whistleblower protection”).
248/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Disclosure Requirement G1-3 – Prevention and detection of corruption and bribery
16. The undertaking shall provide information about its system to prevent and detect, investigate, and respond to
allegations or incidents relating to corruption and bribery including the related training.
17. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide transparency on the key procedures of the undertaking to
prevent, detect, and address allegations about corruption and bribery. This includes the training provided to own
workers and/or information provided internally or to suppliers.
18. The disclosure required under paragraph 16 shall include the following information:
(a) a description of the procedures in place to prevent, detect, and address allegations or incidents of corruption and
bribery;
(b) whether the investigators or investigating committee are separate from the chain of management involved in the
matter; and
(c) the process, if any, to report outcomes to the administrative, management and supervisory bodies.
19. Where the undertaking has no such procedures in place, it shall disclose this fact and, where applicable, its plans to
adopt them.
20. The disclosures required by paragraph 16 shall include information about how the undertaking communicates its
policies to those for whom they are relevant to ensure that the policy is accessible and that they understand its
implications.
21. The disclosure required by paragraph 16 shall include information about the following with respect to training:
(a) the nature, scope and depth of anti-corruption and anti-bribery training programmes offered or required by the
undertaking;
(b) the percentage of functions-at-risk covered by training programmes; and
(c) the extent to which training is given to members of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies.
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement G1-4 – Incidents of corruption or bribery
22. The undertaking shall provide information on incidents of corruption or bribery during the reporting period.
23. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide transparency on the incidents relating to corruption or
bribery during the reporting period and the related outcomes.
24. The undertaking shall disclose:
(a) the number of convictions and the amount of fines for violation of anti-corruption and anti- bribery laws(123);
and
(123) This information supports the information needs of: financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts set out in indicator #17 of Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosures rules on sustainable investments (“Number of
convictions and amount of fines for violation of anti-corruption and anti-bribery laws”); and benchmark administrators to disclose
ESG factors subject to Regulation (EU) 2020/1816 as set out by indicator “Numbers of convictions and amount of fines for
violations of anti-corruption and anti-bribery laws” in section 1 and 2 of Annex II.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 249/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
(b) any actions taken to address breaches in procedures and standards of anti-corruption and anti-bribery(124).
25. The undertaking may disclose:
(a) the total number and nature of confirmed incidents of corruption or bribery;
(b) the number of confirmed incidents in which own workers were dismissed or disciplined for corruption or
bribery-related incidents;
(c) the number of confirmed incidents relating to contracts with business partners that were terminated or not
renewed due to violations related to corruption or bribery; and
(d) details of public legal cases regarding corruption or bribery brought against the undertaking and its own workers
during the reporting period and the outcomes of such cases. This includes cases that were initiated in previous
years where the outcome was only established in the current reporting period.
26. The disclosures required shall include incidents involving actors in its value chain only where the undertaking or its
employees are directly involved.
Disclosure Requirement G1-5 – Political influence and lobbying activities
27. The undertaking shall provide information on the activities and commitments related to exerting its political
influence, including its lobbying activities related to its material impacts, risks and opportunities.
28. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide transparency on the undertaking’s activities and
commitments related to exerting its political influence with political contributions, including the types and purpose
of lobbying activities.
29. The disclosure required by paragraph 27 shall include:
(a) if applicable, the representative(s) responsible in the administrative, management and supervisory bodies for the
oversight of these activities;
(b) for financial or in-kind political contributions:
i. the total monetary value of financial and in-kind political contributions made directly and indirectly by the
undertaking aggregated by country or geographical area where relevant, as well as type of recipient/
beneficiary; and
ii. where appropriate, how the monetary value of in-kind contributions is estimated.
(c) the main topics covered by its lobbying activities and the undertaking’s main positions on these in brief. This
shall include explanations on how this interacts with its material impacts, risks and opportunities identified in
its materiality assessment per ESRS 2; and
(d) if the undertaking is registered in the EU Transparency Register or in an equivalent transparency register in a
Member State, the name of any such register and its identification number in the register.
30. The disclosure shall also include information about the appointment of any members of the administrative,
management and supervisory bodies who held a comparable position in public administration (including
regulators) in the 2 years preceding such appointment in the current reporting period.
Disclosure Requirement G1-6 – Payment practices
31. The undertaking shall provide information on its payment practices, especially with respect to late payments to small
and medium enterprises (SMEs).
(124) This information supports the information needs of financial market participants subject to Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is
derived from an additional indicator related to principal adverse impacts set out in in indicator #16 of Table III of Annex I of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosures rules on sustainable investments (“Cases of
insufficient action taken to address breaches of standards of anti-corruption and anti-bribery”).
250/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
32. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide insights on the contractual payment terms and on its
performance with regard to payment, especially as to how these impact SMEs and specifically with respect to late
payments to SMEs.
33. The disclosure under paragraph 31 shall include:
(a) the average time the undertaking takes to pay an invoice from the date when the contractual or statutory term of
payment starts to be calculated, in number of days;
(b) a description of the undertaking’s standard payment terms in number of days by main category of suppliers and
the percentage of its payments aligned with these standard terms;
(c) the number of legal proceedings currently outstanding for late payments; and
(d) complementary information necessary to provide sufficient context. If the undertaking has used representative
sampling to calculate the information required under point (a), it shall state that fact and briefly describe the
methodology used.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 251/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Appendix A
Application Requirements
This appendix is an integral part of the ESRS G1 Business conduct. It supports the application of the disclosure requirements
set out in this standard and has the same authority as the other parts of the Standard.
Impact, risk and opportunity management
Disclosure Requirement G1-1 – Business conduct policies and corporate culture
AR 1. The undertaking may consider the following aspects when determining its disclosure under paragraph 7:
(a) the aspects of corporate culture that are taken into consideration and discussed by the administrative,
management and supervisory bodies and with which frequency;
(b) the principal themes that are promoted and communicated as part of the corporate culture;
(c) how the members of the undertaking’s administrative, management and supervisory bodies provide direction
to promote a corporate culture; and
(d) specific incentives or tools for its own workers to foster and encourage its corporate culture.
Disclosure Requirement G1-2 – Management of relationships with suppliers
AR 2. For purposes of this standard, management of relationships with the undertaking’s suppliers may include the
following:
(a) how the undertaking’s practices, including activities to avoid or minimise the impacts of disruptions to its
supply chain, support its strategy and risk management;
(b) training of the undertaking’s procurement/supply chain workforce on engagement and dialogue with suppliers
as well as incentives of its procurement workforce including whether such incentives refer to price, quality or
sustainability factors;
(c) the screening and evaluation of social and environmental performance of suppliers;
(d) the inclusion of locally based suppliers in its supply chain and/or suppliers with certification;
(e) how the undertaking’s practices deal with vulnerable suppliers;
(f) the undertaking’s targets and actions with regard to communication and management of relationships with
suppliers; and
(g) how the outcomes of these practices are evaluated, including supplier visits, audits or surveys.
AR 3. 'Vulnerable suppliers’ includes suppliers that are exposed to significant economic, environmental and/or social
risks.
Disclosure Requirement G1-3 – Prevention and detection of corruption and bribery
AR 4. ‘Functions-at-risk’ means those functions deemed to be at risk of corruption and bribery as a result of its tasks and
responsibilities.
AR 5. Disclosures may include details about the risk assessments and/or mapping, as well as monitoring
programmes and/or internal control procedures performed by the undertaking to detect corruption and bribery.
252/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 6. The undertaking’s policies on corruption and bribery may be relevant to specific groups of people, either because
they are expected to implement them (for example, the undertaking’s employees, contractors and suppliers), or
because they have a direct interest in their implementation (for example, value chain workers, investors). The
undertaking may disclose the communication tools and channels (e.g., flyers, newsletters, dedicated websites,
social media, face to face interactions, unions and/or workers representatives) to communicate policies to such
groups. This may also include the identification and/or removal of potential barriers to dissemination, such as
through translation into relevant languages or the use of graphic depictions.
AR 7. The undertaking may disclose an analysis of its training activities by, for example, region of training or category of
own workforce where its programmes differ significantly based on such factors and such information would be
useful to users.
AR 8. The undertaking may present the required information about training using the following table:
Anti-corruption and bribery training illustrative example
During the 20XY financial year ABC provided training to its at-risk own workers in terms of its policy (see note x). For those at-risk
functions the training is mandatory, but ABC also made available voluntary training for other own workers. Details of its training
during the year is as follows:
At-risk Other own
Managers AMSB(125)
functions workers
Training coverage
Total 20 000 200 16 70 000
Total receiving training 19 500 150 8 5 000
Delivery method and
duration
Classroom training 5hours
Computer-based training 1hour 2hours 1hour
Voluntary computer-based 1hour
training
Frequency
How often training is required Annually Annually Bi-annually -
Topics covered
Definition of corruption X X X X
Policy X X X X
Procedures on suspicion/detection X X
Etc. X
Metrics and targets
Disclosure Requirement G1-5 – Political influence and lobbying activities
AR 9. For purposes of this Standard ‘political contribution’ means financial or in-kind support provided directly to
political parties, their elected representatives or persons seeking political office. Financial contributions can
include donations, loans, sponsorships, advance payments for services, or the purchase of tickets for fundraising
events and other similar practices. In-kind contributions can include advertising, use of facilities, design and
printing, donation of equipment, provision of board membership, employment or consultancy work for elected
politicians or candidates for office.
(125) Administrative, management and supervisory bodies.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 253/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
AR 10. ‘Indirect political contribution’ refers to those political contributions made through an intermediary organisation
such as a lobbyist or charity, or support given to an organisation such as a think tank or trade association linked
to or supporting particular political parties or causes.
AR 11. When determining ‘comparable position’ in this standard, the undertaking shall consider various factors, including
level of responsibility and scope of activities undertaken.
AR 12. The undertaking may provide the following information on its financial or in-kind contributions with regard to its
lobbying expenses:
(a) the total monetary amount of such internal and external expenses; and
(b) the total amount paid for membership to lobbying associations.
AR 13. If the undertaking is legally obliged to be a member of a chamber of commerce or other organisation that
represents its interests, it may disclose that this is the case.
AR 14. In meeting the requirement in paragraph 29(c) the undertaking shall consider the alignment between its public
statements on its material impacts, risks and opportunities and its lobbying activities.
AR 15. An example of what such disclosures could look like:
Political engagement (including lobbying activities) illustrative example
During the 20XY financial year ABC was involved in activities around the proposed regulation XXX which could have
significant negative impacts on its business model if implemented in the current format. ABC’s considers that while the
proposed regulation will realise some improvements to the regulatory regime such as xxx, in its current format the costs
relating to xxx will outweigh the benefits. ABC and its peers continue to work with XXX (the regulator) to improve this
balance.
ABC also supported the QRP political party in Country X and EFG party in Country Y as both …. ABC is registered in its
local transparency register, i.e., XYZ, and its registration number is 987234.
Amounts in € thousands.
2023 2022 [TBC]
Political funding provided 100
Funding to QRP 75
Funding to EFG 25
100
Disclosure Requirement G1-6 – Payment practices
AR 16. In some cases, the undertaking’s standard contractual payment terms may differ significantly depending on
country or type of supplier. In such cases, information about the standard terms per main categories of suppliers
or country or geographical region could be examples of additional contextual information to explain the
disclosures in paragraph 33(b).
AR 17. An example of what the description of standard contract term disclosures in paragraph 33(b) could look like:
ABC’s standard contract payment terms are payment on receipt of invoice for wholesalers which encompass approximately 80%
of its annual invoices by value. It pays for services received within 30 days after receipt of the invoice which are about 5% of its
annual invoices. The remainder of its invoices are paid within 60 days of receipt except for those in country X which in
accordance with the marketplace standards are paid within 90 days of receipt.
254/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
ANNEX II
ACRONYMS AND GLOSSARY OF TERMS
This Annex presents all the acronyms found in the ESRS (Table 1) as well as all terms defined in the ESRS (Table 2).
Table 1
Acronyms
AMS Automated Measuring Systems
AQI Air Quality Indices
AR Application Requirements
AWS Alliance for Water Stewardship
BAT Best Available Technique
BAT-AEL Best Available Technique-Associated Emission Level
BAT-AEPL Best Available Technique-Associated Environmental Performance Level
BREFs Best Available Techniques Reference Documents
Btu British Thermal Units
CapEx Capital Expenditure
CBD Convention for Biological Diversity
CDDA Common Database on Designated Areas
CEN European Committee for Standardization
CENELEC European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization
CH4 Methane
CICES Common International Classification of Ecosystem Services
C02 Carbon Dioxide
CRR Regulation (EU) 757/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council(1)(Capital
Requirements Regulation)
DEGURBA Degree of Urbanisation
DR BP-1 Disclosure Requirement - General basis for preparation of the sustainability statements
DR BP-2 Disclosure Requirement - Disclosures in relation to specific circumstances
DR GOV-1 Disclosure Requirement - The role of the administrative, management and supervisory
bodies
DR GOV-2 Disclosure Requirement - Information provided to and sustainability matters addressed by
the undertaking’s administrative, management and supervisory bodies
DR GOV-3 Disclosure Requirement - Integration of sustainability- related performance in incentive
schemes
DR GOV-4 Disclosure Requirement - Statement on sustainability due diligence
DR GOV-5 Disclosure Requirement - Risk management and internal controls over sustainability
reporting
(1) Regulation (EU) 757/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential requirements for credit
institutions and investment firms and amending Regulation (EU) 648/2012 (OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 1).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 255/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
DR SBM-1 Disclosure Requirement - Market position, strategy, business model(s) and value chain
DR SBM-2 Disclosure Requirement - Interests and views of stakeholders
DR SBM-3 Disclosure Requirement - Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction
with strategy and business model(s)
DR IRO-1 Disclosure Requirement - Description of the processes to identify and assess material
impacts, risks and opportunities
DR IRO-2 Disclosure Requirements in ESRS covered by the undertaking’s sustainability statements
DNSH Do No Significant Harm
DR Disclosure Requirements
EBA European Banking Authority
EC European Commission
EEA European Economic Area
EFRAG European Financial Reporting Advisory Group
EFRAG SRB European Financial Reporting Advisory Group Sustainability
Reporting Board
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment
EMAS Eco-Management and Audit Scheme
EPC Energy Performance Certificate
E-PRTR European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register
ESA European Supervisory Authorities
ESMA European Securities and Markets Authority
ESRS European Sustainability Reporting Standards
ESRS 1 European Sustainability Reporting Standard 1 General requirements
ESRS 2 European Sustainability Reporting Standard 2 General disclosures
ESRS E1 European Sustainability Reporting Standard E1 Climate change
ESRS E2 European Sustainability Reporting Standard E2 Pollution
ESRS E3 European Sustainability Reporting Standard E3 Water and marine resources
ESRS E4 European Sustainability Reporting Standard E4 Biodiversity and ecosystems
ESRS E5 European Sustainability Reporting Standard E5 Resource use and circular economy
ESRS G1 European Sustainability Reporting Standard G1 Business conduct
ESRS S1 European Sustainability Reporting Standard S1 Own workforce
ESRS S2 European Sustainability Reporting Standard S2 Workers in the value chain
ESRS S3 European Sustainability Reporting Standard S3 Affected communities
ESRS S4 European Sustainability Reporting Standard S4 Consumers & end-users
EU European Union
EU ETS European Union Emissions Trading System
256/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
EWC European Works Council
FPIC Free, Prior and Informed Consent
FTE Full-time equivalent
GAAP Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
GHG Greenhouse Gas
GJ Giga-Joules
GRI Global Reporting Initiative
GWP Global Warming Potential
HFCs Hydrofluorocarbons
IED Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council(2)(Industrial
Emissions Directive)
IFC International Finance Corporation
IFRS International Financial Reporting Standards
ILO International Labour Organisation
IPBES Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
ISEAL International Social and Environmental Accreditation and Labelling Alliance
ISO International Organization for Standardization
ISSB International Sustainability Standards Board
ITS Implementing Technical Standards
IUCN International Union for Conservation of Nature
KBA Key Biodiversity Areas
Kg Kilogram
lb Pounds
LEAP Locate Evaluate Assess Prepare
LGBTQI Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, Intersex
MDR Minimum Disclosure Requirement
MWh Mega-Watt-hours
N2O Nitrous Oxide
NACE Statistical Classification of Economic Activities in the European Community
NF3 Nitrogen trifluoride
NGOs Non-Governmental Organisations
NH3 Ammonia
NOX Nitrogen oxides
NUTS Nomenclature of Territorial Units of Statistics
O3 Ozone
(2) Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated
pollution prevention and control) (OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 257/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
ODS Ozone-depleting substance
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OECM One Earth Climate Model
OpEX Operating Expenditure
PBTS Persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic substances
PCAF Partnership for Carbon Accounting Financial
PCFs Perfluorocarbons
PM Particulate Matter
PMTs Persistent, Mobile and Toxic Substances
POPs Persistent organic pollutants
REACH Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals
SBTi Science Based Targets Initiative
SBTN Science Based Targets Network
SCE Societas Cooperativa Europaea
SDA Sectoral Decarbonisation Approach
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals
SDPI Sustainable Development Performance Indicator
SE Societas Europaea
SEEA System of Environmental-Economic Accounting
SEEA EA System of Environmental-Economic Accounting Ecosystem Accounting
SFDR Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 of the European Parliament and of the Council(3)(Sustainable
Finance Disclosures Regulation)
SOX Sulphur oxides
SVHC Substances of Very High Concern
TCFD Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures
TNFD Taskforce on Nature-related Financial Disclosures
UN United Nations
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
vPvBs Very persistent and very bioaccumulative substances
vPvMs Very persistent and very mobile substances
WDPA World Database of Protected Areas
WRI World Resources Institute
WWF World-Wide Fund for Nature
(3) Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 November 2019 on sustainability-related disclosures
in the financial services sector (OJ L 317, 9.12.2019, p. 1).
258/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Table 2
Terms defined in the ESRS
This table defines the terms to be used as reference for the preparation of the sustainability statements in accordance with
the ESRS.
Defined term Definition
Actions Actions refer to:
i. actions and action plans (including transition plans) that are undertaken
to ensure that the undertaking delivers against targets set and through
which the undertaking seeks to address material impacts, risks and
opportunities; and
ii. decisions to support these with financial, human or technological
resources.
Actor in the value chain Individuals or entities in the upstream or downstream value chain. The actor
is considered downstream from the undertaking (e.g., distributors,
customers) when it receives products or services from the undertaking; it is
considered upstream from the undertaking (e.g., suppliers) when it provides
products or services that are used in the production of the undertaking’s
own products or services.
Adequate wage A wage that provides for the satisfaction of the needs of the worker and his /
her family in the light of national economic and social conditions.
Administrative, management and The governance bodies with the highest decision-making authority in the
supervisory bodies undertaking including its committees. If in the governance structure, there
are no members of the administrative, management or supervisory bodies
of the undertaking, the CEO, and if such function exists, the deputy CEO,
should be included. In some jurisdictions, governance systems consist of
two tiers, where supervision and management are separated. In such cases,
both tiers are included under the definition of administrative, management
and supervisory bodies.
Affected Communities People or group(s) living or working in the same area that have been or may
be affected by a reporting undertaking’s operations or through its upstream
and downstream value chain. Affected communities can range from those
living adjacent to the undertaking’s operations (local communities) to those
living at a distance. Affected communities include actually and potentially
affected indigenous peoples.
Annual total remuneration Annual total remuneration to own workforce includes salary, bonus, stock
awards, option awards, non-equity incentive plan compensation, change in
pension value, and nonqualified deferred compensation earnings provided
over the course of a year.
Anticipated financial effects Financial effects that do not meet the recognition criteria for inclusion in
the financial statement line items in the reporting period and that are not
captured by the current financial effects.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 259/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Area at water risk A water catchment, where several physical aspects related to water:
i. lead to one or more water bodies to be in less than good status and / or
deteriorate in status (as defined in Directive 2000/60/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council(4)), thus pointing to significant issues as
regards water availability, quality, quantity (including high water-stress);
and/or
ii. lead to issues as regards accessibility of water, regulatory or reputational
issues (including the shared use of water with communities and
affordability of water) for its facilities and for the facilities of key
supplier(s).
Area of high-water stress Regions where the percentage of total water withdrawn is high (40-80%) or
extremely high (greater than 80%) in the Aqueduct Water Risk Atlas tool of
the World Resources Institute (WRI). See also water scarcity.
Associated process materials Materials that are needed for the manufacturing process but are not part of
the final product, such as lubricants for manufacturing machinery.
Best Available Techniques (BAT) A document containing the parts of a BAT reference document laying down
conclusions the conclusions on best available techniques, their description, information
to assess their applicability, the emission levels associated with the best
available techniques, the environmental performance levels associated
with the best available techniques, the minimum content of an
environmental management system including benchmarks associated with
the best available techniques, associated monitoring, associated
consumption levels and, where appropriate, relevant site remediation
measures(5).
Best Available Technique-Associated The range of emission levels obtained under normal operating conditions
Emission Level (BAT-AEL) using a best available technique or a combination of best available
techniques, as described in BAT conclusions, expressed as an average over
a given period of time, under specified reference conditions, i.e., the
emission level that is associated with a BAT.
Best Available Technique-Associated The range of environmental performance levels, except emission levels,
Environmental Performance Level (BAT- obtained under normal operating conditions using a BAT or a
AEPL) combination of BATs(6).
Best Available Techniques (BAT)(7) The most effective and advanced stage in the development of activities and
their methods of operation which indicates the practical suitability of
particular techniques for providing the basis for emission limit values and
other permit conditions designed to prevent and, where that is not
practicable, to reduce emissions and the impact on the environment as a
whole:
i. “techniques” includes both the technology used and the way in which the
installation is designed, built, maintained, operated and
decommissioned;
(4) Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a framework for Community
action in the field of water policy (OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, p. 1).
(5) Directive 2010/75/EU on industrial emissions (IED).
(6) Commission Implementing Decision of 10 February 2012 laying down rules concerning guidance on the collection of data and on the
drawing up of BAT reference documents and on their quality assurance referred to in Directive 2010/75/EU of the European
Parliament and of the Council on industrial emissions (OJ L 63, 2.3.2012, p. 1).
(7) Article 3 point 10 of Directive 2010/75/EU on industrial emissions (IED).
260/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
ii. “available techniques” means those developed on a scale which allows
implementation in the relevant industrial sector, under economically
and technically viable conditions, taking into consideration the costs
and advantages, whether or not the techniques are used or produced
inside the Member State in question, as long as they are reasonably
accessible to the operator; and
iii. “best” means most effective in achieving a high general level of
protection of the environment as a whole.
Biodiversity loss The reduction of any aspect of biological diversity (i.e., diversity at the
genetic, species and ecosystem levels) in a particular area through death
(including extinction), destruction or physicalmanual removal; it can refer
to many scales, from global extinctions to population extinctions, resulting
in decreased total diversity at the same scale.
Biodiversity or biological diversity The variability among living organisms from all sources including terrestrial,
marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which
they are a part. This includes variation in genetic, phenotypic, phylogenetic,
and functional attributes, as well as changes in abundance and distribution
over time and space within and among species, biological communities and
ecosystems.
Biodiversity sensitive area Natura 2000 network of protected areas, UNESCO World Heritage sites and
Key Biodiversity Areas (‘KBAs’), as well as other protected areas, as referred
to in Appendix D of Annex II to Commission Delegated Regulation
(EU) 2021/2139(8).
Biosphere integrity or ecological integrity The ability of an ecosystem to support and maintain ecological processes
and a diverse community of organisms.
Blue economy The blue economy encompasses all industries and sectors related to oceans,
seas and coasts, whether they are based in the marine environment (e.g.,
shipping, fisheries, energy generation) or on land (e.g. ports, shipyards,
land-based aquaculture and algae production, coastal tourism).
BREF or EU Best Available Techniques A document resulting from the exchange of information organised pursuant
reference documents to Article 13 of Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of
the Council(9)on industrial emissions, drawn up for defined activities and
describing, in particular, applied techniques, present emissions and
consumption levels, techniques considered for the determination of best
available techniques as well as BAT conclusions and any emerging
techniques, giving special consideration to the criteria listed in Annex III of
Directive 2010/75/EU.
Bribery Dishonestly persuading someone to act in your favour by giving them a gift
of money or another inducement.
(8) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2139 of 4 June 2021 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European
Parliament and of the Council by establishing the technical screening criteria for determining the conditions under which an economic
activity qualifies as contributing substantially to climate change mitigation or climate change adaptation and for determining whether
that economic activity causes no significant harm to any of the other environmental objectives (OJ L 442, 9.12.2021, p. 1).
(9) Directive 2010/75/EU on industrial emissions (IED).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 261/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Business model The undertaking’s system of transforming inputs through its activities into
outputs and outcomes that aims to fulfil the undertaking’s strategic
purposes and create value over the short-, medium- and long-term. ESRS
use the term “business model” in the singular, although it is recognised
that undertakings may have more than one business model.
Business relationships The relationships the undertaking has with business partners, entities in its
value chain, and any other non-State or State entity directly linked to its
business operations, products or services. Business relationships are not
limited to direct contractual relationships. They include indirect business
relationships in the undertaking’s value chain beyond the first tier, and
shareholding positions in joint ventures or investments.
By-product A substance or object resulting from a production process the primary aim
of which is not the production of that substance or object is considered not
to be waste, but to be a by-product if the following conditions are met:
i. further use of the substance or object is certain;
ii. the substance or object can be used directly without any further
processing other than normal industrial practice;
iii. the substance or object is produced as an integral part of a production
process; and
iv. further use is lawful, i.e., the substance or object fulfils all relevant
product, environmental and health protection requirements for the
specific use and will not lead to overall adverse environmental or
human health impacts.
Carbon credit A transferable or tradable instrument that represents one metric tonne of
CO2eq emission reduction or removal and is issued and verified according
to recognised quality standards.
Carbon dioxide (CO2) equivalent (eq) The universal unit of measurement to indicate the global warming potential
(GWP) of each greenhouse gas, expressed in terms of the GWP of one unit of
carbon dioxide. It is used to evaluate releasing (or avoiding releasing)
different greenhouse gases on a common basis.
Child labour Work that deprives children of their childhood, their potential and their
dignity, and that is harmful to physical and mental development. It refers
to work that:
i. is mentally, physically, socially or morally dangerous and harmful to
children; and/or
ii. interferes with their schooling by depriving them of the opportunity to
attend school; obliging them to leave school prematurely; or requiring
them to attempt to combine school attendance with excessively long
and heavy work.
A child is defined as a person under the age of 18. Whether or not particular
forms of ‘work’ can be called ‘child labour’ depends on the child’s age, the
type and hours of work performed and the conditions under which it is
performed. The answer varies from country to country, as well as among
sectors within countries.
The minimum age of work should not be less than the minimum age of
completion of compulsory schooling, and, in any case, should not be less
than 15 years according to International Labour Organisation (ILO)
Convention No. 138 on Minimum Age. Exceptions can occur in certain
countries where economies and educational facilities are insufficiently
developed, and a minimum age of 14 years applies.
262/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
These countries of exception are specified by the International Labour
Organisation (ILO) in response to a special application by the country
concerned and in consultation with representative organisations of
employers and workers.
National laws may permit the employment of persons 13 to 15 years of age
in light work as long as it is not likely to be harmful to their health or
development and does not prejudice their attendance at school or
participation in vocational or training programmes. The minimum age for
admission into work which by its nature or the circumstances in which it is
carried out is likely to jeopardise the health, safety or morals of young
persons shall not be less than 18 years.
Circular economy An economic system in which the value of products, materials and other
resources in the economy is maintained for as long as possible, enhancing
their efficient use in production and consumption, thereby reducing the
environmental impact of their use, minimising waste and the release of
hazardous substances at all stages of their life cycle, including through the
application of the waste hierarchy.
Circular economy principles The European circular economy principles are:
i. usability;
ii. reusability;
iii. repairability;
iv. disassembly;
v. remanufacturing or refurbishment;
vi. recycling;
vii. recirculation by the biological cycle;
viii. other potential optimisation of product and material use.
Circular material use rate Recirculation of materials, components and products in practice after first
use employing the following strategies (in order of preference):
i. maintenance/prolonged use;
ii. reuse/redistribution;
iii. refurbishment/remanufacturing;
iv. recycling, composting, or anaerobic digestion.
The use rate is defined as the ratio of circular use of materials to overall use
of materials.
Classified information EU classified information as defined in Council Decision 2013/488/EU(10)
on the security rules for protecting EU classified information or classified
by one of the Member States and marked as per Appendix B of that Council
decision.
Climate change adaptation The process of adjustment to actual and expected climate change and its
impacts.
Climate change mitigation The process of reducing GHG emissions and holding the increase in the
global average temperature to 1,5 °C above pre-industrial levels, in line
with the Paris Agreement.
Climate resilience The capacity of an undertaking to adjust to climate changes, and to
developments or uncertainties related to climate change. Climate
resilience involves the capacity to manage climate-related Scope 1 and
benefit from climate-related opportunities, including the ability to respond
(10) 2013/488/EU: Council Decision of 23 September 2013 on the security rules for protecting EU classified information (OJ L 274,
15.10.2013, p. 1).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 263/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
and adapt to transition risks and physical risks. An undertaking’s climate
resilience includes both its strategic resilience and its operational resilience
to climate-related changes, developments or uncertainties associated with
climate change.
Climate-related opportunity Potential positive effects related to climate change for the undertaking.
Efforts to mitigate and adapt to climate change can produce opportunities
for undertakings. Climate-related opportunities will vary depending on the
region, market, and industry where an undertaking operates.
Climate-related physical risk (Physical Risks resulting from climate change that can be event-driven (acute) or from
risk from climate change) longer-term shifts (chronic) in climate patterns.
Acute physical risks arise from particular hazards, especially weather-
related events such as storms, floods, fires or heatwaves. Chronic physical
risks arise from longer-term changes in the climate, such as temperature
changes, and their effects on rising sea levels, reduced water availability,
biodiversity loss and changes in land and soil productivity.
Climate-related transition risk Risks that arise from the transition to a low-carbon and climate-resilient
economy. They typically include policy risks, legal risks, technology risks,
market risks and reputational risks.
Collective bargaining All negotiations which take place between an employer, a group of
employers or one or more employers' organisations, on the one hand, and
one or more trade unions or, in their absence, the representatives of the
workers duly elected and authorised by them in accordance with national
laws and regulations, on the other, for:
i. determining working conditions and terms of employment; and/or
ii. regulating relations between employers and workers; and/or regulating
relations between employers or their organisations and a workers'
organisation or workers' organisations.
Confirmed incident (child or forced Incident of child or forced labour or human trafficking that has been found
labour or human trafficking) to be substantiated. Confirmed incidents do not include incidents of child
or forced labour or human trafficking that are still under investigation in the
reporting period.
Confirmed incident of corruption or An incident of corruption or bribery that has been found to be
bribery substantiated. Confirmed incidents of corruption or bribery do not
include incidents of corruption or bribery that are still under investigation
at the end of the reporting period. The determination of potential non-
compliance cases as substantiated may be made either by the undertaking’s
compliance officer or similar function or an authority. A determination as
substantiated by a court of law is not required.
Consumer Individuals who acquire, consume or use goods and services for personal
use, either for themselves or for others, and not for resale, commercial or
trade, business, craft or profession purposes.
Corporate culture Corporate culture expresses goals through values and beliefs. It guides the
undertaking’s activities through shared assumptions and group norms such
as values or mission statements or a code of conduct.
264/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Corruption Abuse of entrusted power for private gain, which can be instigated by
individuals or organisations. It includes practices such as facilitation
payments, fraud, extortion, collusion, and money laundering. It also
includes an offer or receipt of any gift, loan, fee, reward, or other
advantage to or from any person as an inducement to do something that is
dishonest, illegal, or a breach of trust in the conduct of the undertaking’s
business. This can include cash or in-kind benefits, such as free goods,
gifts, and holidays, or special personal services provided for the purpose of
an improper advantage, or that can result in moral pressure to receive such
an advantage.
Credible proxies Individuals with sufficiently deep experience in engaging with affected
stakeholders from a particular region or context (for example, women
workers on farms, indigenous peoples or migrant workers) who can help
to effectively convey their likely concerns. In practice, this can include
development and human rights NGOs, international trade unions and local
civil society, including faith-based organisations.
Current financial effects Financial effects for the current reporting period that are recognised in the
primary financial statements.
Decarbonisation levers Aggregated types of mitigation actions such as energy efficiency,
electrification, fuel switching, use of renewable energy, products change,
and supply-chain decarbonisation that fit with undertakings' specific
actions.
Deforestation Temporary or permanent human-induced conversion of forested land to
non-forested land(11).
Degradation or degraded ecosystem Chronic human impacts resulting in the loss of biodiversity and the
disruption of an ecosystem’s structure, composition, and functionality.
Dependencies The situation of an undertaking being dependent on natural, human and/or
social resources for its business processes.
Deposit in water and soil An amount of a substance that has accumulated in the environment, either
in water or in soil, and either as a consequence of regular activities or from
incidents or from disposals of undertakings, independent of whether that
accumulation occurs at the production site of an undertaking or outside.
Desertification Land degradation in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas resulting from
various factors, including climatic variations and human activities.
Desertification does not refer to the natural expansion of existing deserts.
Discharge Wastewater discharge means the amount of water (in m3) or substance (in
kg BOD/d or comparable) added / leached to a water body from a point or a
non-point source. Sewage effluent (or discharge) means treated sewage
discharged from a sewage treatment plant.
(11) Annex I point 21 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 of 6 April 2022 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2019/2088
of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical standards specifying the details of the content and
presentation of the information in relation to the principle of ‘do no significant harm’, specifying the content, methodologies and
presentation of information in relation to sustainability indicators and adverse sustainability impacts, and the content and
presentation of the information in relation to the promotion of environmental or social characteristics and sustainable investment
objectives in pre-contractual documents, on websites and in periodic reports (OJ L 196, 25.7.2022, p. 1).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 265/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Discrimination Discrimination can occur directly or indirectly. Direct discrimination
occurs when an individual is treated less favourably by comparison to how
others, who are in a similar situation, have been or would be treated, and the
reason for this is a particular characteristic they hold, which falls under a
‘protected ground’. Indirect discrimination occurs when an apparently
neutral rule disadvantages a person or a group sharing the same
characteristics. It must be shown that a group is disadvantaged by a
decision when compared to a comparator group.
Double materiality Double materiality has two dimensions: impact materiality and financial
materiality. A sustainability matter meets the criterion of double
materiality if it is material from the impact perspective or the financial
perspective or both.
Durability of a product, component or The ability of a product, component or material to remain functional and
material relevant when used as intended.
Ecological threshold The point at which a relatively small change in external conditions causes a
rapid change in an ecosystem. When an ecological threshold has been
passed, the ecosystem may no longer be able to return to its state by means
of its inherent resilience.
Ecosystem extent The size of an ecosystem asset, whereas an ecosystem asset is the contiguous
space of a specific ecosystem type characterised by a distinct set of biotic and
abiotic components and their interactions.
Ecosystem restoration Any intentional activities that initiate or accelerate the recovery of an
ecosystem from a degraded state.
Ecosystem services The contributions of ecosystems to the benefits that are used in economic
and other human activity, respectively the benefits people obtain from
ecosystems. In the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, ecosystem services
can be divided into supporting, regulating, provisioning and cultural. The
Common International Classification of Ecosystem Services (CICES)
classifies types of ecosystems services.
Ecosystem(s) A dynamic complex of plant, animal and micro-organism communities and
their non-living environment interacting as a functional unit. A typology of
ecosystems is provided by the IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 2.0.
Emission The direct or indirect release of substances, vibrations, heat or noise from
individual or diffuse sources into air, water or soil(12).
Employee An individual who is in an employment relationship with the undertaking
according to national law or practice.
End-users Individuals who ultimately use or are intended to ultimately use a particular
product or service.
Equal opportunities Equal and non-discriminatory access, among individuals, to opportunities
for education, training, employment, career development and the exercise
of power without their being disadvantaged on the basis of criteria such as
gender, racial or ethnic origin, nationality, religion or belief, disability, age or
sexual orientation.
(12) Directive 2010/75/EU on industrial emissions (IED).
266/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Equal treatment The principle of equal treatment is a general principle of European law
which presupposes that comparable situations or parties in comparable
situations are treated in the same way. In the context of ESRS S1, the term
“equal treatment” also refers to the principle of non-discrimination,
according to which there shall be no direct or indirect discrimination
based on any ground such as sex, race, colour, ethnic or social origin,
genetic features, language, religion or belief, political or any other opinion,
membership of a national minority, property, birth, disability, age or sexual
orientation.
Financial effects Effects from risks and opportunities that affect the undertaking’s financial
position, financial performance and cash flows over the short, medium or
long term.
Financial materiality A sustainability matter is material from a financial perspective if it generates
risks or opportunities that affect (or could reasonably be expected to affect)
the undertaking’s financial position, financial performance, cash flows,
access to finance or cost of capital over the short, medium or long term.
Forced labour All work or service which is exacted from any person under the threat of
penalty and for which the person has not offered himself or herself
voluntarily. The term encompasses all situations in which persons are
coerced by any means to perform work and includes both traditional
‘slave-like’ practices and contemporary forms of coercion where labour
exploitation is involved, which may include human trafficking and modern
slavery.
Fossil fuel Non-renewable carbon-based energy sources such as solid fuels, natural gas
and oil.
Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) A manifestation of indigenous peoples’ right to self-determine their
political, social, economic and cultural priorities. It constitutes three
interrelated and cumulative rights of indigenous peoples: the right to be
consulted; the right to participate; and the right to their lands, territories
and resources. FPIC pertains to indigenous peoples and is recognized
under international human rights law, notably the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP).
Freshwater Groundwater and surface water, with a mean annual salinity of < 0,5 ‰ (i.e.,
the limit mentioned in Annex II of the Water Framework Directive).
GHG emission reduction Decrease in the undertaking’s Scope 1, 2, 3 or total GHG emissions at the
end of the reporting period, relative to emissions in the base year. Emission
reductions may result from, among others, energy efficiency, electrification,
suppliers' decarbonisation, electricity mix decarbonisation, sustainable
products development or changes in reporting boundaries or activities
(e.g., outsourcing, reduced capacities), provided they are achieved within
the undertaking's own operations and upstream and downstream value
chain. Removals and avoided emissions are not counted as emission
reductions.
GHG removal and storage (Anthropogenic) removals refer to the withdrawal of GHGs from the
atmosphere as a result of deliberate human activities. These include
enhancing biological anthropogenic sinks of CO2 and using chemical
engineering to achieve long-term removal and storage. Carbon capture and
storage (CCS) from industrial and energy-related sources, which alone does
not remove CO2 from the atmosphere, can remove atmospheric CO2 if it is
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 267/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
combined with bioenergy production (Bioenergy with Carbon Capture &
Storage - BECCS). Removals can be subject to reversals, which are any
movement of stored GHG out of the intended storage that re-enters the
atmosphere. For example, if a forest that was grown to remove a specific
amount of CO2 is subject to a wildfire, the emissions captured in the trees
are reversed.
Global warming potential (GWP) A factor describing the radiative forcing impact (degree of harm to the
atmosphere) of one unit of a given GHG relative to one unit of CO2.
Greenhouse Gases (GHG) The gases listed in Part 2 of Annex V of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the
European Parliament and of the Council(13). These include Carbon dioxide
(CO2), Methane (CH4), Nitrous Oxide (N2O), Sulphur hexafluoride (SF6),
Nitrogen trifluoride (NF3), Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), Perfluorocarbons
(PFCs).
Grievance mechanism Any routinized, state-based or non-state-based, judicial or non-judicial
processes through which stakeholders can raise grievances and seek
remedy. Examples of state-based judicial and non-judicial grievance
mechanisms include courts, labour tribunals, national human rights
institutions, National Contact Points under the OECD Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises, ombudsperson offices, consumer protection
agencies, regulatory oversight bodies, and government-run complaints
offices. Non-state-based grievance mechanisms include those administered
by the undertaking, either alone or together with stakeholders, such as
operational-level grievance mechanisms and collective bargaining,
including the mechanisms established by collective bargaining. They also
include mechanisms administered by industry associations, international
organisations, civil society organisations, or multi-stakeholder groups.
Operational-level grievance mechanisms are administered by the
organisation either alone or in collaboration with other parties and are
directly accessible by the organisation’s stakeholders. They allow for
grievances to be identified and addressed early and directly, thereby
preventing both harm and grievances from escalating. They also provide
important feedback on the effectiveness of the organisation’s due diligence
from those who are directly affected.
According to UN Guiding Principle 31, effective grievance mechanisms are
legitimate, accessible, predictable, equitable, transparent, rights-compatible,
and a source of continuous learning. In addition to these criteria, effective
operational-level grievance mechanisms are also based on engagement and
dialogue. It can be more difficult for the organisation to assess the
effectiveness of grievance mechanisms that it participates in compared to
those it has established itself.
Groundwater All water which is below the surface of the ground in the saturation zone
and in direct contact with the ground or subsoil(14).
(13) Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the Governance of the Energy
Union and Climate Action, amending Regulations (EC) No 663/2009 and (EC) No 715/2009 of the European Parliament and of the
Council, Directives 94/22/EC, 98/70/EC, 2009/31/EC, 2009/73/EC, 2010/31/EU, 2012/27/EU and 2013/30/EU of the European
Parliament and of the Council, Council Directives 2009/119/EC and (EU) 2015/652 and repealing Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of
the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 1).
(14) Article 2(20) of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2020 on the establishment of a
framework to facilitate sustainable investment, and amending Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 (OJ L 198, 22.6.2020, p. 13).
268/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Habitat The place or type of site where an organism or population naturally occurs.
Also used to mean the environmental attributes required by a particular
species or its ecological niche.
Habitat fragmentation A general term describing the set of processes by which habitat loss results
in the division of continuous habitats into a greater number of smaller
patches of lesser total size and isolated from each other by a matrix of
dissimilar habitats. Habitat fragmentation may occur through natural
processes (e.g., forest and grassland fires, flooding) and through human
activities (forestry, agriculture, urbanisation).
Harassment A situation where an unwanted conduct related to a protected ground of
discrimination (for example, gender under Directive 2006/54/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council(15), or religion or belief, disability,
age or sexual orientation under Council Directive 2000/78/EC(16)) occurs
with the purpose or effect of violating the dignity of a person, and of
creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive
environment.
Hazardous waste Waste which displays one or more of the hazardous properties listed in
Annex III of Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council(17)on waste.
High climate impact sectors Sectors that are listed in Sections A to H and Section L of Annex I to
Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006 of the European Parliament and of the
Council(18) (as defined in Commission Delegated Regulation
(EU) 2022/1288(19)).
Impacts The effect the undertaking has or could have on the environment and
people, including effects on their human rights, connected with its own
operations and upstream and downstream value chain, including through
its products and services, as well as through its business relationships. The
impacts can be actual or potential, negative or positive, intended or
unintended, and reversible or irreversible. They can arise over the short-,
medium-, or long-term. Impacts indicate the undertaking’s contribution,
negative or positive, to sustainable development.
Impact drivers All the factors that cause changes in nature, anthropogenic assets, nature’s
contributions to people and a good quality of life. Direct drivers of change
can be both natural and anthropogenic. They have direct physical
(mechanical, chemical, noise, light etc.) and behaviour-affecting impacts on
nature. They include, inter alia, climate change, pollution, different types of
land use change, invasive alien species and zoonoses, and exploitation.
(15) Directive 2006/54/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 July 2006 on the implementation of the principle of equal
opportunities and equal treatment of men and women in matters of employment and occupation (OJ L 204, 26.7.2006, p. 23).
(16) Council Directive 2000/78/EC of 27 November 2000 establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and
occupation (OJ L 303, 2.12.2000, p. 16).
(17) Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives
(OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3).
(18) Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 establishing the statistical
classification of economic activities NACE Revision 2 and amending Council Regulation (EEC) No 3037/90 as well as certain EC
Regulations on specific statistical domains (OJ L 393, 30.12.2006, p. 1).
(19) Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 of 6 April 2022 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 of the European
Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical standards specifying the details of the content and presentation of
the information in relation to the principle of ‘do no significant harm’, specifying the content, methodologies and presentation of
information in relation to sustainability indicators and adverse sustainability impacts, and the content and presentation of the
information in relation to the promotion of environmental or social characteristics and sustainable investment objectives in pre-
contractual documents, on websites and in periodic reports (OJ L 196, 25.7.2022, p. 1).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 269/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Indirect impact drivers operate diffusely by altering and influencing direct
drivers (by affecting their level, direction or rate) as well as other indirect
drivers. Interactions between indirect and direct drivers create different
chains of relationship, attribution, and impacts, which may vary according
to type, intensity, duration, and distance. These relationships can also lead to
different types of spill-over effects. Global indirect drivers include economic,
demographic, governance, technological and cultural ones. Special attention
is given, among indirect drivers, to the role of institutions (both formal and
informal) and impacts of the patterns of production, supply and
consumption on nature, nature’s contributions to people and good quality
of life.
Impact materiality A sustainability matter is material from an impact perspective when it
pertains to the undertaking’s material actual or potential, positive or
negative impacts on people or the environment over the short-, medium-
and long-term. A material sustainability matter from an impact perspective
includes impacts connected with the undertaking’s own operations and
upstream and downstream value chain, including through its products and
services, as well as through its business relationships.
Incident A legal action or complaint registered with the undertaking or competent
authorities through a formal process, or an instance of non-compliance
identified by the undertaking through established procedures. Established
procedures to identify instances of non-compliance can include
management system audits, formal monitoring programs, or grievance
mechanisms.
Incineration The controlled burning of waste at high temperature with or without energy
recovery.
Independent board member Board members that exercise independent judgment free from any external
influence or conflicts of interest. Independence generally means the exercise
of objective, unfettered judgement. When used as the measure by which to
judge the appearance of independence, or to categorise a non-executive
member of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies or
their committees as independent, it means the absence of an interest,
position, association or relationship which, when judged from the
perspective of a reasonable and informed third party, is likely to influence
unduly or cause bias in decision-making.
Indigenous peoples There is no single definition for indigenous peoples agreed on at the
international level. In practice, there is convergence among international
agencies on what groups can be considered indigenous peoples and should
enjoy special protection as such. An important criteria for defining
indigenous people is related to their connection to a traditional area, as
defined in ILO Convention No. 169, Article 1, which states that the
convention applies to: “(a) tribal peoples in independent countries whose social,
cultural and economic conditions distinguish them from other sections of the
national community, and whose status is regulated wholly or partially by their own
customs or traditions or by special laws or regulations; (b) peoples in independent
countries who are regarded as indigenous on account of their descent from the
populations which inhabited the country, or a geographical region to which the
country belongs, at the time of conquest or colonisation or the establishment of
present state boundaries and who, irrespective of their legal status, retain some or
all of their own social, economic, cultural and political institutions”. ILO
Convention 169 also states in Article 1(2) that: “[s]elf-identification as
indigenous or tribal shall be regarded as a fundamental criterion for determining
the groups to which the provisions of this Convention apply”.
270/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Indirect GHG emissions GHG emissions that are a consequence of the activities of an entity but
occur at sources owned or controlled by another entity. Indirect emissions
are Scope 2 GHG emissions and scope 3 GHG emissions combined.
Installation A stationary technical unit within which one or more activities are carried
out which could have an effect on emissions and pollution.
Internal carbon price Price used by an undertaking to assess the financial implications of changes
to investment, production, and consumption patterns, and of potential
technological progress and future emissions abatement costs.
Internal carbon pricing scheme An organisational arrangement that allows an undertaking to apply carbon
prices in strategic and operational decision making. There are two types of
internal carbon prices commonly used by undertakings. The first type is a
shadow price, which is a theoretical cost or notional amount that the
undertaking does not charge but that can be used in assessing the
economic implications or trade-offs for such things as risk impacts, new
investments, net present value of projects, and the cost-benefit of various
initiatives. The second type is an internal tax or fee, which is a carbon price
charged to a business activity, product line, or other business unit based on
its GHG emissions (these internal taxes or fees are similar to intracompany
transfer pricing).
Invasive or alien species Species whose introduction and/or spread by human action outside their
natural distribution threatens biological diversity, food security, and
human health and well-being. “Alien’ refers to the species’ having been
introduced outside its natural distribution (“exotic’, “non-native’ and “non-
indigenous’ are synonyms for “alien’). “Invasive’ means “tending to expand
into and modify ecosystems to which it has been introduced’. Thus, a species
may be alien without being invasive, or, in the case of a species native to a
region, it may increase and become invasive, without actually being an alien
species.
Key Biodiversity Area (KBA) Sites contributing significantly to the global persistence of biodiversity’, in
terrestrial, freshwater and marine ecosystems. Sites qualify as global KBAs
if they meet one or more of 11 criteria, clustered into five categories:
threatened biodiversity; geographically restricted biodiversity; ecological
integrity; biological processes; and, irreplaceability. The World Database of
KBAs is managed by BirdLife International on behalf of the KBA
Partnership.
Land degradation The many processes that drive the decline or loss in biodiversity, ecosystem
functions or their benefits to people and includes the degradation of all
terrestrial ecosystems.
Landfill A waste disposal site for the deposit of the waste onto or into land(20).
Land-system (change) The terrestrial component of the Earth system, encompassing all processes
and activities related to the human use of land. These include socio-
economic, technological and organisational inputs and arrangements, as
well as the benefits gained from land and the unintended social and
ecological outcomes of societal activities. The land-systems concept
(20) Article 2 point (g) of Council Directive 1999/31/EC of 26 April 1999 on the landfill of waste (OJ L 182, 16.7.1999, p. 1).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 271/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
combines land-use (the activities, arrangements and inputs associated with
land-use) with land cover (the ensemble of physical characteristics of land
discernible by Earth Observation).
Land-use (change) The human use of a specific area for a certain purpose (such as residential;
agriculture; recreation; industrial, etc.). Influenced by, but not synonymous
with, land cover. Land-use change refers to a change in the use or
management of land by humans, which may lead to a change in land cover.
Legitimate representatives Individuals recognised as legitimate under law or practice, such as elected
trade union representatives in the case of workers, or other similarly freely
chosen representatives of affected stakeholders.
Leverage The ability of the undertaking to effect a change in the wrongful practices of
another party that is connected with a negative sustainability-related impact.
Lobbying activities Activities carried out with the objective of influencing the formulation or
implementation of policy or legislation, or the decision-making processes
of governments, governmental institutions, regulators, European Union
institutions, bodies, offices and agencies or standard setters. Such activities
include (non-exhaustive list):
i. organising or participating in meetings, conferences, events;
ii. contributing to/participating in public consultations, hearings or other
similar initiatives;
iii. organising communication campaigns, platforms, networks, grassroots
initiatives;
iv. preparing/commissioning policy and position papers, opinion polls,
surveys, open letters, research work as per the activities covered by
transparency register rules.
Locked-in GHG emissions Estimates of future GHG emissions that are likely to be caused by an
undertaking’s key assets or products sold within their operating lifetime.
Longevity Designed for maintenance and durability in such a way that encourages
longer use than the industry standard in practice and at scale and in such a
way that does not compromise circular treatment at the end of functional
life.
Marine resources Biological and non-biological resources found in the seas and oceans.
Examples include but are not limited to deep sea minerals, gravels, and
seafood products
Material opportunities Sustainability related opportunities with positive financial effects that
materially affect, (or could reasonably be expected to affect) the
undertaking’s cash flows, access to finance, or cost of capital over the
short, medium or long term.
Material risks Sustainability related risks with negative financial effects that materially
affect (or could reasonably be expected to affect) the undertaking’s cash
flows, access to finance, or cost of capital over the short, medium or long
term.
Materiality A sustainability matter is material if it meets the definition of impact
materiality, financial materiality, or both.
272/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Metrics Qualitative and quantitative indicators that the undertaking uses to measure
and report on the effectiveness of the delivery of its sustainability-related
policies and against its targets over time. Metrics also support the
measurement of the undertaking’s results in respect of affected people, the
environment and the undertaking.
Microplastics Small pieces of plastics, usually smaller than 5mm. A growing volume of
microplastics is found in the environment, including the sea, and in food
and drinking water. Once in the environment, microplastics do not
biodegrade and tend to accumulate, unless they are specifically designed to
biodegrade in the open environment. Biodegradability is a complex
phenomenon, especially in the marine environment. There are increasing
concerns about the presence of microplastics in different environment
compartments (such as water), their impact on the environment and
potentially human health.
Minimum Disclosure Requirement A minimum disclosure requirement sets the required content of the
information that the undertaking includes when it reports on policies,
actions, metrics or targets, either pursuant to a Disclosure Requirement in
an ESRS or on an entity-specific basis.
Natural resources Natural assets (raw materials) occurring in nature that can be used for
economic production or consumption.
Nature-based solutions Actions to protect, conserve, restore, sustainably use and manage natural or
modified terrestrial, freshwater, coastal and marine ecosystems which
address social, economic and environmental challenges effectively and
adaptively, while simultaneously providing human well-being, ecosystem
services, resilience and biodiversity benefits.
Net-zero target Setting a net-zero target at the level of an undertaking aligned with meeting
societal climate goals means:
i. achieving a scale of value chain emissions reductions consistent with the
abatement required to reach global net-zero in 1.5°C pathways; and
ii. neutralizing the impact of any residual emissions (after approximately
90-95% of GHG emission reduction with the possibility for justified
sectoral variations in line with a recognized sectoral pathway) by
permanently removing an equivalent volume of CO2.
Non-employees Non-employees in an undertaking’s own workforce include both individual
contractors supplying labour to the undertaking (“self-employed people”)
and people provided by undertakings primarily engaged in “employment
activities” (NACE Code N78).
Non-renewable energy Energy which cannot be identified as being derived from renewable sources.
Operational control Operational control (over an entity, site, operation or asset) is the situation
where the undertaking has the ability to direct the operational activities and
relationships of the entity, site, operation or asset.
Opportunities Sustainability-related opportunities with positive financial effects.
Overtime The number of hours actually worked by a worker in excess of his or her
contractual hours of work.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 273/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Own workforce/own workers Employees who are in an employment relationship with the undertaking
(‘employees’) and non-employees who are either individual contractors
supplying labour to the undertaking (‘self-employed people’) or people
provided by undertakings primarily engaged in ‘employment activities’
(NACE Code N78).
Ozone-depleting substances Substances listed in the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the
Ozone Layer.
Packaging Products made of any materials of any nature to be used for the
containment, protection, handling, delivery, storage, transport and
presentation of goods, from raw materials to processed goods, from the
producer to the user or consumer(21).
Pay The ordinary basic or minimum wage or salary and any other remuneration,
whether in cash or in kind which the worker receives directly or indirectly
(‘complementary or variable components’), in respect of his/her
employment from his/her employer. ‘Pay level’ means gross annual pay
and the corresponding gross hourly pay. ‘Median pay level’ means the pay
of the employee that would have half of the employees earn more and half
less than they do.
Persons with disabilities Persons who have long-term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory
impairments which in interaction with various barriers may hinder their
full and effective participation in society on an equal basis with others.
Physical risks All global economic enterprise depends on the functioning of earth systems,
such as a stable climate and on ecosystem services, such as the provision of
biomass (raw materials). Nature-related physical risks are a direct result of
an organisation’s dependence on nature. Physical risks arise when natural
systems are compromised, due to the impact of climatic events (e.g.,
extremes of weather such as a drought), geologic events (e.g., seismic
events such as an earthquake) events or changes in ecosystem equilibria,
such as soil quality or marine ecology, which affect the ecosystem services
organisations depend on. These can be acute, chronic, or both. Nature-
related physical risks arise as a result of changes in the biotic (living) and
abiotic (non-living) conditions that support healthy, functioning
ecosystems. Physical risks are usually location-specific. Nature-related
physical risks are often associated with climate-related physical risks.
Planetary boundaries This concept allows to estimate a safe operating space for humanity with
respect to the functioning of the Earth. The boundary level for each key
Earth System process that should not be transgressed if we are to avoid
unacceptable global environmental change, is quantified.
Policy A set or framework of general objectives and management principles that
the undertaking uses for decision-making. A policy implements the
undertaking’s strategy or management decisions related to a material
sustainability matter. Each policy is under the responsibility of defined
person(s), specifies its perimeter of application, and includes one or more
objectives (linked when applicable to measurable targets). A policy is
validated and reviewed following the undertakings’ applicable governance
rules. A policy is implemented through actions or action plans.
(21) Article 3(1) of Directive 94/62/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 1994 on packaging and packaging
waste (OJ L 365, 31.12.1994, p. 10).
274/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Pollutant A substance, vibration, heat, noise, light or other contaminant present in air,
water or soil which may be harmful to human health and/or the
environment, which may result in damage to material property, or which
may impair or interfere with amenities and other legitimate uses of the
environment(22).
Pollution The direct or indirect introduction, as a result of human activity, of
pollutants into air, water or soil which may be harmful to human health
and/or the environment, which may result in damage to material property,
or which may impair or interfere with amenities and other legitimate uses of
the environment(23).
Pollution of soil The introduction into soil – independent of whether that introduction
occurs at the production site of an undertaking or outside or through the
use of the undertaking’s products and/or services – as a result of human
activity, of substances, vibrations, heat or noise which may be harmful to
human health or the environment, result in damage to material property,
or impair or interfere with amenities and other legitimate uses of the
environment(24). Soil pollutants include inorganic pollutants, persistent
organic pollutants (POPs), pesticides, nitrogen and phosphorus
compounds, etc.
Protected area A clearly defined geographical space, recognised, dedicated and managed,
through legal or other effective means, to achieve the long-term
conservation of nature with associated ecosystem services and cultural
values.
Purchased or acquired electricity, heat, When the undertaking has received its electricity, heat, steam, or cooling
steam, or cooling from a third party. The term “acquired” reflects circumstances where a
company may not directly purchase electricity (e.g., a tenant in a building),
but where the energy is brought into the undertaking’s facility for use.
Raw material Primary or secondary material that is used to produce a product.
Recognised quality standards for carbon Quality standards for carbon credits that are verifiable by independent third
credits parties, make requirements and project reports publicly available and at a
minimum ensure additionality, permanence, avoidance of double counting
and provide rules for calculation, monitoring, and verification of the
project’s GHG emissions and removals.
Recordable work-related injury or ill Work-related injury or ill health that results in any of the following:
health i. death, days away from work, restricted work or transfer to another job,
medical treatment beyond first aid, or loss of consciousness; or
ii. significant injury or ill health diagnosed by a physician or other licensed
healthcare professional, even if it does not result in death, days away
from work, restricted work or job transfer, medical treatment beyond
first aid, or loss of consciousness.
(22) Article 2(10) of Regulation (EU) 2020/852 on the establishment of a framework to facilitate sustainable investment.
(23) Directive 2010/75/EU on industrial emissions (IED).
(24) Directive 2010/75/EU on industrial emissions (IED).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 275/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Recovery Any operation the principal result of which is waste serving a useful purpose
by replacing other materials which would otherwise have been used to fulfil
a particular function, or waste being prepared to fulfil that function, in the
plant or in the wider economy(25).
Recycling Any recovery operation by which waste materials are reprocessed into
products, materials or substances whether for the original or other
purposes. It includes the reprocessing of organic material but does not
include energy recovery and the reprocessing into materials that are to be
used as fuels or for backfilling operations.
Resource regeneration Promotion of self-renewal capacity of natural systems with the aim of
reactivating ecological processes damaged or over-exploited by human
action.
Remedy/remediation To counteract or make good a negative impact. Examples: apologies,
financial or non-financial compensation, prevention of harm through
injunctions or guarantees of non-repetition, punitive sanctions (whether
criminal or administrative, such as fines), restitution, restoration,
rehabilitation.
Renewable energy Energy from renewable non-fossil sources, namely wind, solar (solar
thermal and solar photovoltaic) and geothermal energy, ambient energy,
tide, wave and other ocean energy, hydropower, biomass, landfill gas,
sewage treatment plant gas, and biogas(26).
Renewable materials Materials that are derived from resources that are quickly replenished by
ecological cycles or agricultural processes, so that the services provided by
these and other linked resources are not endangered and remain available for
the next generation.
Resource inflows Resource that enters the undertaking’s facilities.
Resource outflows Resource that leaves the undertaking’s facilities.
Resource use optimisation The design, production and distribution of materials and products with the
objective to keep them in use at their highest value. Eco-design and design
for longevity, repair, reuse, repurposing, disassembly, remanufacturing are
examples of tools to optimise resource use.
Reuse Any operation by which products and components that are not waste are
used again for the same purpose for which they were conceived. This may
involve cleaning or small adjustments so it is ready for the next use without
significant modification.
River basin The area of land from which all surface run-off flows through a sequence of
streams, rivers and, possibly, lakes into the sea at a single river mouth,
estuary or delta.
Risks Sustainability-related risks with negative financial effects arising from
environmental, social or governance matters that may negatively affect the
undertaking's financial position, financial performance, cash flows, access to
finance or cost of capital in the short, medium or long term.
(25) Article 3(15) of Directive 2008/98/EC on waste.
(26) Article 2(1) Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the promotion of the
use of energy from renewable sources (OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 82).
276/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Scenario A plausible description of how the future may develop based on a coherent
and internally consistent set of assumptions about key driving forces (e.g.,
rate of technological change, prices) and relationships. Note that scenarios
are neither predictions nor forecasts but are used to provide a view of the
implications of developments and actions.
Scenario analysis A process for identifying and assessing a potential range of outcomes of
future events under conditions of uncertainty.
Scope 1 GHG emissions Direct GHG emissions from sources that are owned or controlled by the
undertaking.
Scope 2 GHG emissions Indirect emissions from the generation of purchased or acquired electricity,
steam, heat or cooling consumed by the undertaking.
Scope 3 GHG emissions All indirect GHG emissions (not included in scope 2 GHG emissions) that
occur in the value chain of the reporting undertaking, including both
upstream and downstream emissions. Scope 3 GHG emissions can be
broken down into scope 3 categories.
Scope 3 category One of the 15 types of Scope 3 GHG emissions identified by the GHG
Protocol Corporate Standard and detailed by the GHG Protocol Corporate
Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard (adapted from
GHG Protocol Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and
Reporting Standard, Glossary (Version 2011). Undertakings that choose to
account for their Scope 3 emissions based on the indirect GHG emissions
categories of ISO 14064-1:2018 may also refer to the category defined in
clause 5.2.4 (excluding indirect GHG emissions from imported energy) of
ISO 14064-1:2018.
Sensitive information Sensitive information as defined in Regulation (EU) 2021/697 of the
European Parliament and of the Council(27) establishing the European
Defence Fund.
Site The location of one or more physical installations. If there is more than one
physical installation from the same or different owners or operators and
certain infrastructure and facilities are shared, the entire area where the
physical installation are located may constitute a site.
Social dialogue All types of negotiation, consultation or simply exchange of information
between, or among, representatives of governments, employers, their
organisations and workers’ representatives, on issues of common interest
relating to economic and social policy. It can exist as a tripartite process,
with the government as an official party to the dialogue or it may consist
of bipartite relations only between workers' representatives and
management (or trade unions and employers' organisations).
Social protection The set of measures designed to reduce and prevent poverty and
vulnerability across the life cycle.
Soil The top layer of the Earth’s crust situated between the bedrock and the
surface. The soil is composed of mineral particles, organic matter, water,
air and living organisms(28).
(27) Regulation (EU) 2021/697 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2021 establishing the European Defence Fund
and repealing Regulation (EU) 2018/1092 (OJ L 170, 12.5.2021, p. 149).
(28) Article 3(21) of Directive 2010/75/EU on industrial emissions (IED).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 277/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Soil degradation The diminishing capacity of the soil to provide ecosystem goods and services
as desired by its stakeholders.
Soil sealing Covering soil in a way that makes the covered area impermeable (e.g. a road).
This non-permeability can create environmental impacts as described in
Commission Regulation (EU) 2018/2026(29).
Specific loads Mass of pollutant released per mass of product manufactured. Specific
loads allow for the comparison of the environmental performance of
installations irrespective of their different production volumes and are not
influenced by mixing or dilution(30).
Stakeholder engagement An ongoing process of interaction and dialogue between the undertaking
and its stakeholders that enables the undertaking to hear, understand and
respond to their interests and concerns.
Stakeholders Those who can affect or be affected by the undertaking. There are two main
groups of stakeholders:
i. Affected stakeholders: individuals or groups whose interests are affected
or could be affected – positively or negatively – by the undertaking’s
activities and its direct and indirect business relationships across its
value chain; and
ii. users of sustainability statements: primary users of general purpose
financial reporting (existing and potential investors, lenders and other
creditors including asset managers, credit institutions, insurance
undertakings), as well as other users, including the undertaking’s
business partners, trade unions and social partners, civil society and
non-governmental organisations, governments, analysts and academics.
Some, but not all, stakeholders may belong to the two groups.
Substances Any chemical element and its compounds, with the exception of the
following substances:
i. radioactive substances as defined in Article 1 of Council Directive
96/29/Euratom(31) laying down basic safety standards for the
protection of the health of workers and the general public against the
dangers arising from ionising radiation;
ii. genetically modified micro-organisms as defined in Article 2(b) of
Directive 2009/41/EC of the European Parliament and the Council(32)
on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms;
(29) Commission Regulation (EU) 2018/2026 of 19 December 2018 amending Annex IV to Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit
scheme (EMAS) (OJ L 325, 20.12.2018, p. 18).
(30) Commission Implementing Decision of 10 February 2012 laying down rules concerning guidance on the collection of data and on the
drawing up of BAT reference documents and on their quality, assurance referred to in Directive 2010/75/EU of the European
Parliament and of the Council on industrial emissions.
(31) Council Directive 96/29/Euratom of 13 May 1996 laying down basic safety standards for the protection of the health of workers and
the general public against the dangers arising from ionizing radiation (OJ L 159, 29.6.1996, p. 1).
(32) Directive 2009/41/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 May 2009 on the contained use of genetically modified
micro-organisms (OJ L 125, 21.5.2009, p. 75).
278/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
iii. genetically modified organisms as defined in point 2 of Article 2 of
Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council(33) on the deliberate release into the environment of
genetically modified organisms.(34)
Substances of concern A substance that:
i. meets the criteria laid down in Article 57 and is identified in accordance
with Article 59(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European
Parliament and of the Council(35);
ii. is classified in Part 3 of Annex VI to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of
the European Parliament and of the Council(36)in one of the following
hazard classes or hazard categories:
— carcinogenicity categories 1 and 2;
— germ cell mutagenicity categories 1 and 2;
— reproductive toxicity categories 1 and 2;
— endocrine disruption for human health;
— endocrine disruption for the environment;
— Persistent, Mobile and Toxic or Very Persistent, Very Mobile proper­
ties;
— Persistent, Bioaccumulative and Toxic or Very Persistent, Very Bioac­
cumulative properties;
— respiratory sensitisation category 1;
— skin sensitisation category 1;
— chronic hazard to the aquatic environment categories 1 to 4;
— hazardous to the ozone layer;
— specific target organ toxicity, repeated exposure categories 1 and 2;
— specific target organ toxicity, single exposure categories 1 and 2; or
iii. negatively affects the re-use and recycling of materials in the product in
which it is present, as defined in relevant Union product-specific
ecodesign requirements.
Substances of Very High Concern Substances that meet the criteria laid down in Article 57 of Regulation (EC)
(SVHCs) No 1907/2006 (REACH) and were identified in accordance with
Article 59(1) of that Regulation.
Supplier Entity upstream from the organisation (i.e., in the organisation’s supply
chain), which provides a product or service that is used in the development
of the organisation’s own products or services. A supplier can have a direct
business relationship with the organisation (often referred to as a first-tier
supplier) or an indirect business relationship.
(33) Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 March 2001 on the deliberate release into the
environment of genetically modified organisms and repealing Council Directive 90/220/EEC (OJ L 106, 17.4.2001, p. 1).
(34) Directive 2010/75/EU on industrial emissions (IED).
(35) Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration,
Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive
1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council
Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC (OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p. 1)
(36) Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling and
packaging of substances and mixtures, amending and repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC, and amending Regulation
(EC) No 1907/2006 (OJ L 353, 31.12.2008, p. 1).
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 279/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Supply chain The full range of activities or processes carried out by entities upstream from
the undertaking, which provide products or services that are used in the
development and production of the undertaking’s own products or
services. This includes upstream entities with which the undertaking has a
direct relationship (often referred to as a first-tier supplier) and entities with
which the undertaking has an indirect business relationship.
Surface water Inland waters, except groundwater; transitional waters and coastal waters,
except in respect of chemical status for which it shall also include territorial
waters(37).
Sustainability matters Environmental, social and human rights, and governance factors, including
sustainability factors defined in Article 2, point (24), of Regulation
(EU) 2019/2088 of the European Parliament and of the Council(38).
Sustainability statement The dedicated section of the undertaking’s management report where the
information about sustainability matters prepared in compliance with
Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council(39)
and the ESRS is presented.
Sustainability-related opportunities Uncertain environmental, social or governance events or conditions that, if
they occur, could cause a potential material positive effect on the
undertaking's business model, or strategy on its capability to achieve its
goals and targets and to create value, and therefore may influence its
decisions and those of its business relationship partners with regard to
sustainability matters. Like any other opportunity, sustainability-related
opportunities are measured as a combination of an impact’s magnitude
and the probability of occurrence.
Sustainability-related risks Uncertain environmental, social or governance events or conditions that, if
they occur, could cause a potential material negative effect on the
undertaking's business model or strategy and on its capability to achieve
its goals and targets and to create value, and therefore may influence its
decisions and those of its business relationships with regard to
sustainability matters. Like any other risks, sustainability- related risks
are the combination of an impact’s magnitude and the probability of
occurrence.
Sustainability-related impacts The effect the undertaking has or could have on the environment and
people, including effects on their human rights, as a result of the
undertaking's activities or business relationships. The impacts can be
actual or potential, negative or positive, short-term, medium or long-term,
intended or unintended, and reversible or irreversible. Impacts indicate the
undertaking's contribution, negative or positive, to sustainable
development.
(37) Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a framework for Community
action in the field of water policy (Water Framework Directive).
(38) Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 on sustainability-related disclosures in the financial services sector.
(39) Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on the annual financial statements,
consolidated financial statements and related reports of certain types of undertakings, amending Directive 2006/43/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 78/660/EEC and 83/349/EEC (OJ L 182, 29.6.2013, p. 19).
280/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Systemic risks Risks arising from the breakdown of the entire system, rather than the
failure of individual parts. They are characterised by modest tipping points
combining indirectly to produce large failures with cascading of interactions
of physical and transition risks (contagion), as one loss triggers a chain of
others, and with systems unable to recover equilibrium after a shock. An
example is the loss of a keystone species, such as sea otters, which have a
critical role in ecosystem community structure. When sea otters were
hunted to near extinction in the 1900s, the coastal ecosystems flipped and
biomass production was greatly reduced.
Targets Measurable, outcome-oriented and time-bound goals that the undertaking
aims to achieve in relation to material impacts, risks or opportunities.
They may be set voluntarily by the undertaking or derive from legal
requirements on the undertaking.
Threatened species Endangered species, including flora and fauna, listed in the European Red
List or the IUCN Red List, as referred to in Section 7 of Annex II to
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2139.
Training Initiatives put in place by the undertaking aimed at the maintenance and/or
improvement of skills and knowledge of its own workers. It can include
different methodologies, such as on-site training, and online training.
Transition plan A specific type of action plan that is adopted by the undertaking in relation
to a strategic decision and that addresses:
i. a public policy objective; and/or
ii. an entity-specific action plan organised as a structured set of targets and
actions, associated with a key strategic decision, a major change in
business model, and/or particularly important actions and allocated
resources.
Transition plan for climate change An aspect of an undertaking’s overall strategy that lays out the undertaking’s
mitigation targets, actions and resources for its transition towards a lower–carbon
economy, including actions such as reducing its GHG emissions with
regard to the objective of limiting global warming to 1.5°C and climate
neutrality.
Transition risks Risks that result from a misalignment between an organisation’s or
investor’s strategy and management and the changing regulatory, policy or
societal landscape in which it operates. Developments aimed at halting or
reversing damage to the climate or to nature, such as government
measures, technological breakthroughs, market changes, litigation and
changing consumer preferences can all create or change transition risks.
Users Users of sustainability statements are primary users of general-purpose
financial reporting (existing and potential investors, lenders and other
creditors including asset managers, credit institutions, insurance
undertakings), as well as other users, including the undertaking’s business
partners, trade unions and social partners, civil society and non-
governmental organisations, governments, analysts and academics.
Value chain The full range of activities, resources and relationships related to the
undertaking’s business model and the external environment in which it
operates.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 281/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
A value chain encompasses the activities, resources and relationships the
undertaking uses and relies on to create its products or services from
conception to delivery, consumption and end-of- life. Relevant activities,
resources and relationships include:
i. those in the undertaking’s own operations, such as human resources;
ii. those along its supply, marketing and distribution channels, such as
materials and service sourcing and product and service sale and
delivery; and
iii. the financing, geographical, geopolitical and regulatory environments in
which the undertaking operates.
Value chain includes actors upstream and downstream from the
undertaking. Actors upstream from the undertaking (e.g., suppliers)
provide products or services that are used in the development of the
undertaking’s products or services. Entities downstream from the
undertaking (e.g., distributors, customers) receive products or services
from the undertaking.
ESRS use the term “value chain” in the singular, although it is recognised that
undertakings may have multiple value chains.
Value chain worker An individual performing work in the value chain of the undertaking,
regardless of the existence or nature of any contractual relationship with
the undertaking. In the ESRS, the scope of workers in the value chain
include all workers in the undertaking’s upstream and downstream value
chain who are or can be materially impacted by the undertaking. This
includes impacts that are connected to the undertaking’s own operations,
and value chain, including through its products or services, as well as
through its business relationships. This includes all workers who are not
in the scope of ‘Own Workforce’ (‘Own Workforce’ includes people who
are in an employment relationship with the undertaking (‘employees’) and
non-employees who are either individual contractors supplying labour to
the undertaking (‘self-employed people’) or people provided by
undertakings primarily engaged in employment activities. (NACE Code N78)
Wage Gross wage, excluding variable components such as overtime and incentive
pay, and excluding allowances unless they are guaranteed.
Waste Any substance or object which the holder discards or intends or is required
to discard(40).
Waste hierarchy Priority order in waste prevention and management(41):
i. prevention;
ii. preparing for re-use;
iii. recycling;
iv. other recovery (e.g., energy recovery); and
v. disposal.
Waste management The collection, transport, recovery and disposal of waste, including the
supervision of such operations and the after-care of disposal sites, and
including actions taken as a dealer or broker(42).
(40) Article 3(1) of Directive 2008/98/EC on waste.
(41) Article 4(1) of the Directive 2008/98/EC on waste.
(42) Article 3(9) of the Directive 2008/98/EC on waste.
282/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojEN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Wastewater Water which is of no further immediate value to the purpose for which it
was used or in the pursuit of which it was produced because of its quality,
quantity, or time of occurrence.
Wastewater from one user can be a potential supply to a user elsewhere.
Cooling water is not considered to be wastewater.
Water consumption The amount of water drawn into the boundaries of the undertaking (or
facility) and not discharged back to the water environment or a third party
over the course of the reporting period.
Water discharge The sum of effluents and other water leaving the boundaries of the
organisation and released to surface water, groundwater, or third parties
over the course of the reporting period.
Water intensity A metric providing the relationship between a volumetric aspect of water
and a unit of activity (products, sales, etc.) created.
Water (recycled and reused) Water and wastewater (treated or untreated) that has been used more than
once before being discharged from the undertaking’s or shared facilities’
boundary, so that water demand is reduced. This may be in the same
process (recycled) or in a different process within the same facility (own or
shared with other undertakings) or in another of the undertaking’s facilities
(reused).
Water scarcity The volumetric abundance, or lack thereof, of freshwater resources. Scarcity
is human driven, it is a function of the volume of human water consumption
relative to the volume of water resources in a given area. As such, an arid
region with very little water, but no human water consumption would not
be considered scarce, but rather arid. Water scarcity is a physical, objective
reality that can be measured consistently across regions and over time.
Water scarcity reflects the physical abundance of freshwater rather than
whether that water is suitable for use. For instance, a region may have
abundant water resources (and thus not be considered water scarce) but
have such severe pollution that those supplies are unfit for human or
ecological uses.
Water withdrawal The sum of all water drawn into the boundaries of the undertaking from all
sources for any use over the course of the reporting period.
Workers’ representatives Workers' representatives means:
i. trade union representatives, namely representatives designated or elected
by trade unions or by members of such unions in accordance with
national legislation and practice;
ii. duly elected representatives, namely representatives who are freely
elected by the workers of the organisation, not under the domination
or control of the employer in accordance with provisions of national
laws or regulations or of collective agreements and whose functions do
not include activities which are the exclusive prerogative of trade unions
in the country concerned and which existence is not used to undermine
the position of the trade unions concerned or their representatives.
ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/oj 283/284EN
OJ L, 22.12.2023
Work-life balance Satisfactory state of equilibrium between an individual’s work and private
life. Work-life balance in a broader sense encompasses not only the
balance between work and private life given family or care responsibilities,
but also time allocation between time spent at work and in private life
beyond family responsibilities.
Work-related hazards Work-related hazards can be:
i. physical (e.g., radiation, temperature extremes, constant loud noise,
spills on floors or tripping hazards, unguarded machinery, faulty
electrical equipment);
ii. ergonomic (e.g., improperly adjusted workstations and chairs, awkward
movements, vibration);
iii. chemical (e.g., exposure to carcinogens, mutagens, reprotoxic
substances, solvents, carbon monoxide, or pesticides);
iv. biological (e.g., exposure to blood and bodily fluids, fungi, bacteria,
viruses, or insect bites);
v. psychosocial (e.g., verbal abuse, harassment, bullying);
vi. related to work-organisation (e.g., excessive workload demands, shift
work, long hours, night work, workplace violence).
Work-related incident Occurrence arising out of or in the course of work that could or does result
in injury or ill health. Incidents might be due to, for example, electrical
problems, explosion, fire, overflow, overturning, leakage, flow, breakage,
bursting, splitting, loss of control, slipping, stumbling and falling, body
movement without stress, body movement under/with stress, shock, fright,
workplace violence or harassment (e.g., sexual harassment).
An incident that results in injury or ill health is often referred to as an
‘accident’. An incident that has the potential to result in injury or ill health
but where none occurs is often referred to as a ‘close call’, ‘near-miss’, or
‘near-hit’.
284/284 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2023/2772/ojDRAFT COMMISSION NOTICE
on the interpretation of certain legal provisions in Directive 2013/34/EU (Accounting
Directive), Directive 2006/43/EC (Audit Directive), Regulation (EU) No 537/2014 (Audit
Regulation), Directive 2004/109/EC (Transparency Directive), Commission Delegated
Regulation (EU) 2023/2772 (first set of European Sustainability Reporting Standards
“first ESRS delegated act”), and Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 (Sustainable Finance
Disclosures Regulation “SFDR”) as regards sustainability reporting
This set of Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) clarifies the interpretation of certain
provisions on sustainability reporting introduced by the Corporate Sustainability Reporting
Directive “CSRD” (Directive (EU) 2022/2464)) into the Accounting Directive (Directive
2013/34/EU), the Audit Directive (Directive 2006/43/EC), the Audit Regulation (Regulation
(EU) No 537/2014), and the Transparency Directive (Directive 2004/109/EC) with the aim of
facilitating their implementation by undertakings. It also clarifies certain provisions of the
Sustainable Finance Disclosures Regulation “SFDR” (Regulation (EU) 2019/2088).
This set of FAQs also includes a limited number of clarifications concerning the
interpretation of certain provisions of the first set of European Sustainability Reporting
Standards “ESRS” (Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2772), where legal
interpretation from the Commission has been deemed to be necessary. Undertakings and
other stakeholders may also wish to consult the implementation guidance on ESRS published
by EFRAG, the multistakeholder advisory body tasked with advising the Commission on
ESRS.1
Through this set of FAQs, the Commission intends to facilitate the compliance of
stakeholders with the regulatory requirements in a cost-effective way and to ensure the
usability and comparability of the reported information on sustainability. By providing
greater clarity and certainty to companies, this set of FAQs will contribute to the
Commission's objective of reducing administrative burdens on undertakings associated with
sustainability reporting2. The Commission may update these FAQs where appropriate.
The replies to the FAQs contained in this Notice clarify the provisions already contained in
the applicable legislation. They do not extend in any way the rights and obligations deriving
from such legislation nor introduce any additional requirements. These FAQs are merely
intended to assist undertakings in the implementation of the relevant legal provisions. Only
the Court of Justice of the European Union is competent to authoritatively interpret Union
law. The views expressed in this Notice cannot prejudge the position that the Commission
might take before the Union and national courts.
1 www.efrag.org EFRAG has published implementation guidance on materiality assessment, on value-chain
reporting and on the list of datapoints contained in ESRS. EFRAG is currently developing implementation
guidance on climate transition plans. In addition, EFRAG has established an online Q&A platform through
which undertakings and other stakeholders can submit technical questions on ESRS.
2 In order to rationalise reporting obligations, the Commission has made full use of its empowerment in Article
3(13) Accounting Directive to adopt Commission Delegated Directive (EU) 2023/2775 of 17 October 2023
amending Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L, 2023/2775, 21.12.2023)
to adjust the size criteria applicable to the definition micro, small, medium-sized and large undertakings or
groups for the effects of inflation. This has reduced the number of undertakings subject to sustainability
reporting requirements under the Accounting Directive – and, consequently, under Article 8 of Regulation (EU)
2020/852 (Taxonomy Regulation).
1Table of contents
Section I - Glossary of relevant terms and applicable legislation ........................................ 3
Section II – Overview of the sustainability reporting requirements introduced by the
CSRD ......................................................................................................................................... 5
SUSTAINABILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR REPORTING UNDERTAKINGS .............. 6
REQUIREMENTS FOR STATUTORY AUDITORS AND INDEPENDENT
ASSURANCE SERVICES PROVIDERS (IASPS) ............................................................ 14
Section III – FAQs on sustainability information to be reported under Articles 19a/29a
of the Accounting Directive (individual and consolidated sustainability statement) ...... 17
SCOPE AND APPLICATION DATES .............................................................................. 17
EXEMPTION RULES ......................................................................................................... 22
ESRS .................................................................................................................................... 26
VALUE CHAIN .................................................................................................................. 27
ARTICLE 8 TAXONOMY REGULATION DISCLOSURES ........................................... 31
LANGUAGE REQUIREMENTS ....................................................................................... 32
DIGITALISATION (FORMAT AND DIGITAL TAGGING) .......................................... 33
PUBLICATION ................................................................................................................... 33
SUPERVISION.................................................................................................................... 34
Section IV – FAQs on sustainability information reported under Article 40a of the
Accounting Directive ............................................................................................................. 34
SCOPE AND APPLICATION DATE................................................................................. 34
ESRS .................................................................................................................................... 35
ARTICLE 8 TAXONOMY REGULATION DISCLOSURES ........................................... 36
EXEMPTION RULES ......................................................................................................... 36
LANGUAGE AND FORMAT ............................................................................................ 37
PUBLICATION ................................................................................................................... 37
SUPERVISION.................................................................................................................... 38
Section V – FAQs on the assurance of sustainability reporting ........................................ 38
APPROVAL OF STATUTORY AUDITORS AND AUDIT FIRMS ................................ 38
ACCREDITATION AND APPROVAL OF INDEPENDENT ASSURANCE SERVICES
PROVIDERS (IASPS) ......................................................................................................... 41
ACCREDITED INDEPENDENT THIRD PARTY ............................................................ 41
INDEPENDENT ASSURANCE SERVICES PROVIDERS (IASPS) ............................... 42
THIRD-COUNTRY ASSURANCE PROVIDERS ............................................................. 43
CONFIDENTIALITY.......................................................................................................... 43
ASSURANCE SERVICES .................................................................................................. 44
FEES .................................................................................................................................... 44
2ASSURANCE OF THE SUSTAINABILITY STATEMENT PREPARED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLES 19a AND 29a ACCOUNTING DIRECTIVE .......... 44
NON-ASSURANCE SERVICES ........................................................................................ 47
ASSURANCE OF THE SUSTAINABILITY REPORT PREPARED IN ACCORDANCE
WITH ARTICLE 40a OF THE ACCOUNTING DIRECTIVE .......................................... 48
Section VI – FAQs on key intangible resources .................................................................. 48
Section VII – Additional FAQs on requirements for third-country undertakings .......... 49
Section VIII – FAQ on SFDR ............................................................................................... 51
Section I - Glossary of relevant terms and applicable legislation
Term Definition / Legal reference
Accounting Directive Directive 2013/34/EU3.
Audit Directive Directive 2006/43/EC4.
Audit Regulation Regulation (EU) No 537/20145.
Company Law Directive Directive (EU) 2017/11326.
CSRD Directive (EU) 2022/2464 (Corporate Sustainability
Reporting Directive)7.
ESAP package − Regulation (EU) 2023/2859 establishing a European
Single Access Point (ESAP) providing centralised
access to publicly available information of relevance
to financial services, capital markets and sustainability
(ESAP Regulation)8;
− Regulation (EU) 2023/2869 amending certain
Regulations as regards the establishment and
functioning of the European single access point
(ESAP Omnibus Regulation)9;
− Directive (EU) 2023/2864 amending certain
3 Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on the annual financial
statements, consolidated financial statements and related reports of certain types of undertakings, amending
Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives
78/660/EEC and 83/349/EEC (OJ L 182, 29.6.2013, p. 19).
4 Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2006 on statutory audits of
annual accounts and consolidated accounts, amending Council Directives 78/660/EEC and 83/349/EEC and
repealing Council Directive 84/253/EEC (OJ L 157, 9.6.2006, p. 87).
5 Regulation (EU) No 537/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on specific
requirements regarding statutory audit of public-interest entities and repealing Commission Decision
2005/909/EC (OJ L 158, 27.5.2014, p. 77).
6 Directive (EU) 2017/1132 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2017 relating to certain
aspects of company law (codification) (OJ L 169, 30.6.2017, p. 46).
7 Directive (EU) 2022/2464 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2022 amending
Regulation (EU) No 537/2014, Directive 2004/109/EC, Directive 2006/43/EC and Directive 2013/34/EU, as
regards corporate sustainability reporting (OJ L 322, 16.12.2022, p. 15).
8 Regulation (EU) 2023/2859 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2023 establishing
a European single access point providing centralised access to publicly available information of relevance to
financial services, capital markets and sustainability (OJ L, 2023/2859, 20.12.2023).
9 Regulation (EU) 2023/2869 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2023 amending
certain Regulations as regards the establishment and functioning of the European single access point (OJ L,
2023/2869, 20.12.2023).
3Directives as regards the establishment and
functioning of the European single access point
(ESAP Omnibus Directive)10.
ESEF Delegated Regulation Commission Delegated Regulation 2019/815 on the
European Single Electronic Format (ESEF)11.
LSME ESRS European Sustainability Reporting Standards (ESRS) to
be used by listed Small-and Medium sized undertakings
(SMEs), excluding micro-undertakings, as an alternative
to the ESRS for the preparation of their sustainability
statement under Article 19a of the Accounting Directive.
These ESRS are to be adopted by the Commission based
on Article 29c of the Accounting Directive.
ESRS concerning certain third- European Sustainability Reporting Standards (ESRS) to
country undertakings be used by third-country undertakings subject to Article
40a of the Accounting Directive in the preparation of
their sustainability report. These ESRS are to be adopted
by the Commission based on Article 40b of the
Accounting Directive.
ESRS European Sustainability Reporting Standards (ESRS) to
be used by undertakings within the scope of Articles 19a
and 29a of the Accounting Directive for the preparation
of their sustainability statement in compliance with
Articles 19a and 29a of the Accounting Directive. These
ESRS include both the first set of sector-agnostic ESRS
(which have been adopted by Commission Delegated
Regulation (EU) 2023/277212) and the sector-specific
ESRS (to be adopted by the Commission by 30 June
2026).
SMEs Small and Medium-sized undertakings, as defined in
Article 3(1), (2), and (3) of the Accounting Directive.
SFDR Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 (Sustainable Finance
Disclosures Regulation)13.
Sustainability report Sustainability information to be reported under Article
concerning certain third- 40a of the Accounting Directive.
country undertakings
Sustainability statement Sustainability information to be reported under Articles
19a (individual sustainability statement) and 29a
(consolidated sustainability statement) of the Accounting
Directive.
Taxonomy Regulation Regulation (EU) 2020/85214.
10 Directive (EU) 2023/2864 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2023 amending
certain Directives as regards the establishment and functioning of the European single access point (OJ L,
2023/2864, 20.12.2023).
11 Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2018/815 of 17 December 2018 supplementing Directive
2004/109/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical standards on the
specification of a single electronic reporting format (OJ L 143, 29.5.2019, p. 1).
12 Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2772 of 31 July 2023 supplementing Directive 2013/34/EU of
the European Parliament and of the Council as regards sustainability reporting standards (OJ L, 2023/2772,
22.12.2023).
13 Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 November 2019 on
sustainability‐related disclosures in the financial services sector (OJ L 317, 9.12.2019, p. 1).
4Transparency Directive Directive 2004/109/EC15.
Section II – Overview of the sustainability reporting requirements introduced by the
CSRD
The CSRD (Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive - Directive (EU) 2022/2464) has
introduced new sustainability reporting requirements for certain undertakings by way of
amendments to the Accounting Directive (Directive 2013/34/EU), Audit Directive (Directive
2006/43/EC), Audit Regulation (Regulation (EU) No 537/2014), and Transparency Directive
(Directive 2004/109/EC).
Overall16, these sustainability reporting requirements oblige certain undertakings to publish
sustainability information, which must be prepared in accordance with specific sustainability
reporting standards and, where applicable, comply with a digital format. This sustainability
information is subject to an assurance requirement and must be published together with the
related assurance report.
Overall, these sustainability reporting requirements apply to undertakings governed by the
law of a Member State17 that are:
− large undertakings;
− SMEs (excluding micro-undertakings) with transferable securities admitted to trading
on an EU regulated market; and
− parent undertakings of large groups.
They also apply to undertakings governed by the law of a third country that have either
transferable securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market (excluding micro-
undertakings) or that have business in the territory of the Union above certain thresholds18.
The rules to determine the size of an undertaking and the scope of consolidation for
sustainability reporting purposes rely on the existing rules for financial reporting purposes,
which are set out in the national measures transposing the pre-existing Accounting Directive.
The Accounting Directive thresholds for the determination of the size of each category of
undertaking are indicated in the box within the “Flowchart to identify the applicable
sustainability reporting requirements and the application date” below.
The date of application of these sustainability reporting requirements varies depending on the
specific reporting requirement and on the category of undertaking. The specific application
date for each requirement is indicated in the paragraph “Sustainability requirements for
reporting undertakings” below.
14 Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2020 on the
establishment of a framework to facilitate sustainable investment, and amending Regulation (EU) 2019/2088
(Text with EEA relevance) (OJ L 198, 22.6.2020, p. 13).
15 Directive 2004/109/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 December 2004 on the
harmonisation of transparency requirements in relation to information about issuers whose securities are
admitted to trading on a regulated market and amending Directive 2001/34/EC (OJ L 390, 31.12.2004, p. 38).
16 This is an overview of the main sustainability reporting requirements. Relevant reporting requirements for
undertakings governed by the law of a Member State: Articles 19a, 29a, 40a Accounting Directive. For a more
detailed illustration of each requirement, please see the paragraphs below.
17 This is an overview of the undertakings in the scope of these sustainability reporting requirements. For a more
detailed illustration of the undertakings in the scope of each requirement, please see the paragraphs below.
18 Relevant reporting requirements for undertakings governed by the law of a third country: Article 4(5)
Transparency Directive (which cross-refers to Articles 19a and 29a Accounting Directive) and Article 40a
Accounting Directive.
5As these requirements are introduced by way of a Directive, the specific rules that apply to
undertakings are the ones set out in the national legislation transposing the Accounting
Directive as amended by the CSRD19, as well as by Commission Delegated Directive (EU)
2023/277520 that has adjusted the size criteria applicable to the definition of micro, small,
medium-sized and large undertakings or groups for the effects of inflation, therefore reducing
the number of undertakings subject to sustainability and, to a certain extent, financial
reporting requirements.
The CSRD does not regulate the voluntary disclosure of sustainability information by
undertakings that do not fall under the scope of CSRD (for instance, SMEs without securities
admitted to trading on an EU regulated market), which is not subject to mandatory
requirements at Union level.
SUSTAINABILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR REPORTING UNDERTAKINGS
1. Preparation, assurance and publication of the sustainability information to be
reported under Articles 19a and 29a Accounting Directive (sustainability statement)
1.1 Sustainability information to be reported at individual level under Article 19a
Accounting Directive (sustainability statement)
Based on Article 19a Accounting Directive, undertakings governed by the law of a
Member State that are:
− large undertakings21; or
− SMEs22, excluding micro-undertakings23, with transferable securities24 admitted
to trading on an EU regulated market;
must report sustainability information at individual level (individual sustainability
statement) concerning the undertaking’s impacts on sustainability matters, and
concerning how sustainability matters affect the undertaking’s development,
performance and position.
The individual sustainability statement must comply with the following requirements:
(i) it must be included in a dedicated section of the undertaking’s management
report;
19 The rules on the presentation and the content of the sustainability statement prepared by undertakings are set
out in the delegated acts specifying the relevant European Sustainability Reporting Standards (ESRS). These
standards are adopted by way of Regulations, therefore are directly applicable by undertakings without need for
Member States to transpose them.
20 Commission Delegated Directive (EU) 2023/2775 of 17 October 2023 amending Directive 2013/34/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council as regards the adjustments of the size criteria for micro, small, medium-
sized and large undertakings or groups (OJ L, 2023/2775, 21.12.2023).
21 As defined in Article 3(4) Accounting Directive, as amended by Commission Delegated Directive (EU)
2023/2775.
22 As defined in Article 3(1), (2) and (3) Accounting Directive, as amended by Commission Delegated Directive
(EU) 2023/2775.
23 As defined in Article 3(1) Accounting Directive, as amended by Commission Delegated Directive (EU)
2023/2775.
24 As defined in Article 4(1) point (44) of Directive 2014/65/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 15 May 2014 on markets in financial instruments and amending Directive 2002/92/EC and Directive
2011/61/EU. Transferable securities include, inter alia, shares in companies and other forms of securitised debt.
6(ii) it must be prepared in accordance with the European Sustainability Reporting
Standards (ESRS) adopted by way of Commission delegated acts25. SMEs
(excluding micro-undertakings) with transferable securities admitted to trading on
an EU regulated market may alternatively prepare their individual sustainability
statement in accordance with a dedicated set of proportionate ESRS26 adopted by
way of Commission delegated acts (LSME ESRS)27;
(iii) it must be marked-up in accordance with a digital taxonomy28 adopted by way of
an amendment to Commission Delegated Regulation on the European Single
Electronic Format (ESEF)29, and the management report that includes the
sustainability statement shall be prepared in the XHTML format30;
(iv) it must be subject to assurance31, to be carried out by statutory auditors, or
Independent Assurance Services Providers “IASPs” where allowed by a Member
State, based on limited assurance standards32;
(v) the management report that includes the sustainability statement shall be
published in accordance with the existing publication rules for the management
report33, together with the assurance opinion on the sustainability statement34.
These requirements must be complied with based on the following phased approach35:
− for financial years starting on or after 1 January 2024 (i.e. with publication in
2025): large undertakings which are public-interest entities36 exceeding on their
balance sheet dates the average number of 500 employees during the financial
year;
− for financial years starting on or after 1 January 2025 (i.e. with publication in
2026): the other large undertakings (i.e. large undertakings which are not “public-
interest entities exceeding on their balance sheet dates the average number of
500 employees during the financial year”);
− for financial years starting on or after 1 January 2026 (i.e. with publication in
2027):
25 Article 29b Accounting Directive. These ESRS include both the first set of sector-agnostic ESRS (which have
been adopted by Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2772) and the sector-specific ESRS (to be
adopted by the Commission by 30 June 2026).
26 Article 19a(6) Accounting Directive.
27 Article 29c Accounting Directive.
28 A “digital taxonomy” is a set of rules (which will be adopted by way of an amendment to Commission
Delegated Regulation 2019/815) that will set out how to mark-up the information within the sustainability
statement - which has to be included in a management report drawn-up in XHTML format - in order for the
sustainability statement to become machine-readable.
29 Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2018/815 of 17 December 2018 supplementing Directive
2004/109/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical standards on the
specification of a single electronic reporting format (OJ L 143, 29.5.2019, p. 1).
30 Article 29d Accounting Directive.
31 Article 34 Accounting Directive.
32 Based on Article 26a of the CSRD, the assurance of sustainability reporting must be carried out in compliance
with the limited assurance standards to be adopted by the Commission by 1 October 2026 (and currently under
development). Member States may however apply national assurance standards, procedures or requirements as
long as the Commission has not adopted an assurance standard covering the same subject matter.
33 The sustainability reporting requirements set out in the Accounting Directive as amended by the CSRD do not
modify the pre-existing publication deadline for the management report specified in Article 30 of the
Accounting Directive, i.e. at the latest 12 months after the balance sheet date.
34 Article 30 Accounting Directive.
35 Article 5(2) first subparagraph CSRD.
36 As defined in Article 2 point (1) Accounting Directive.
7• SMEs (excluding micro-undertakings) with transferable securities
admitted to trading on an EU regulated market;
• small and non-complex institutions37 provided they are either large
undertakings or SMEs (excluding micro-undertakings) with transferable
securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market;
• captive insurance undertakings38 and captive reinsurance undertakings39
provided that they are either large undertakings or SMEs (excluding
micro-undertakings) with transferable securities admitted to trading on an
EU regulated market.
SMEs (excluding micro-undertakings) with transferable securities admitted to trading
on an EU regulated market may opt-out from these requirements until financial years
beginning before 1 January 2028, provided that they briefly state in their
management report why the sustainability reporting was not provided40.
The undertaking is exempted from the obligation to publish an individual
sustainability statement where the information is included in the consolidated
sustainability statement of a parent undertaking, provided that certain conditions are
met as regards the content of the exempted undertaking’s management report and the
publication of the sustainability information by the parent undertaking41. Large
undertakings with securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market –
including small and non-complex institutions, captive insurance undertakings and
captive reinsurance undertakings and including third-country undertakings - cannot
avail of this exemption42.
1.2 Sustainability information to be reported at consolidated level under Article 29a
Accounting Directive (consolidated sustainability statement)
Based on Article 29a Accounting Directive, an undertaking governed by the law of a
Member State that is a parent undertaking of a large group43 must report sustainability
information at consolidated level (consolidated sustainability statement) concerning
the undertaking’s impacts on sustainability matters, and concerning how sustainability
matters affect the undertaking’s development, performance and position.
The consolidated sustainability statement must comply with the same requirements
specified for the individual sustainability statement (paragraph 1.1 above, points (i) to
(v))44.
These requirements must be complied with based on the following phased approach45:
− for financial years starting on or after 1 January 2024 (i.e. for publication in
2025): public-interest entities that are parent undertakings of a large group
37 Defined in point (145) of Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013.
38 Defined in point (2) of Article 13 of Directive 2009/138/EC.
39 Defined in point (5) of Article 13 of Directive 2009/138/EC.
40 Article 19a(7) Accounting Directive.
41 These conditions are set out in Article 19a(9) Accounting Directive. See also FAQ 19.
42 Article 19a(10) Accounting Directive.
43 As defined in Article 3(7) Accounting Directive.
44 However, the consolidated sustainability statement can only be prepared using ESRS. Parent undertakings of
large groups that are SMEs with transferable securities admitted to trading on the EU regulated markets may not
use LSME ESRS.
45 Article 5(2) first subparagraph Accounting Directive.
8exceeding on its balance sheet dates, on a consolidated basis, an average number
of 500 employees during the financial year;
− for financial years starting on or after 1 January 2025 (i.e. with publication in
2026): the other parent undertakings of a large group (i.e. parent undertakings of
a large group that are not “public-interest entities and/or whose group does not
exceed on its balance sheet dates, on a consolidated basis, an average number of
500 employees during the financial year”).
A parent undertaking that publishes a consolidated sustainability statement is exempt
from the obligation to publish its individual sustainability statement46. A parent
undertaking that is also a subsidiary undertaking is exempt from publishing a
consolidated sustainability statement where the information is included in the
consolidated sustainability statement or consolidated sustainability reporting of
another parent undertaking, provided that certain conditions are met as regards the
content of the exempted undertaking’s management report and the publication of the
sustainability information by the parent undertaking47. Large undertakings with
securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market – including small and non-
complex institutions, captive insurance undertakings and captive reinsurance
undertakings and including third-country undertakings - cannot avail of this
exemption48.
1.3 Sustainability information to be reported at individual level (sustainability statement)
or - for parent undertakings of large groups - at consolidated level (consolidated
sustainability statement) under Article 4(5) of the Transparency Directive by issuers
of transferable securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market)
Based on Article 4(5) of the Transparency Directive, which cross-refers to Articles
19a and 29a of the Accounting Directive, issuers of transferable securities admitted to
trading on an EU regulated market49 (regardless of whether they are governed by the
law of a Member State or by the law of a third country), excluding micro-
undertakings, must include in their annual financial reports a management report that
includes sustainability information at individual level (sustainability statement) or -
for parent undertakings of large groups - at consolidated level (consolidated
sustainability statement) in compliance with the same requirements specified under
paragraph 1.1 above, points (i) to (v). The publication rules are those established for
the annual financial report under Article 4 of the Transparency Directive50.
Issuers of transferable securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market that
are large undertakings or SMEs (excluding micro-undertakings) or parent
undertakings of large groups as defined in the Accounting Directive, will also have to
publish the management report in compliance with the requirements set out in the
Accounting Directive and specified under paragraphs 1.1 and 1.2 above. Exemption
rules under Articles 19a(8) and 19a(9) of the Accounting Directive also apply.
46 Article 29a(7) Accounting Directive.
47 These conditions are set out in Article 29(8) Accounting Directive. See also FAQ 19.
48 Article 29a(9) Accounting Directive.
49 As defined in Article 2 points (a) and (d) of the Transparency Directive.
50 The sustainability reporting requirements set out in the Transparency Directive as amended by the CSRD do
not modify the pre-existing publication deadline for the annual financial report (which includes the management
report) specified in Article 4(1) Transparency Directive, i.e. at the latest 4 months after the balance sheet date.
9These requirements must be complied with based on the following phased approach51:
− for financial years starting on or after 1 January 2024 (i.e. with publication in
2025): issuers that are large undertakings exceeding on their balance sheet dates
an average number of 500 employees during the financial year, as well as issuers
that are parent undertakings of a large group exceeding on its balance sheet dates,
on a consolidated basis, an average number of 500 employees during the financial
year;
− for financial years starting on or after 1 January 2025 (i.e. with publication in
2026): other issuers that are large undertakings, as well as to other issuers that are
parent undertakings of a large group;
− for financial years starting on or after 1 January 2026 (i.e. with publication in
2027):
• issuers that are SMEs (excluding micro-undertakings);
• issuers defined as small and non-complex institutions provided they are
large undertakings or SMEs (excluding micro-undertakings) with
transferable securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market; and
• issuers defined as captive insurance undertakings and captive reinsurance
undertakings provided that they are either large undertakings or SMEs
(excluding micro-undertakings) with transferable securities admitted to
trading on an EU regulated market.
2. Preparation, assurance, and publication of the sustainability information to be
reported under Article 40a Accounting Directive (sustainability report for
certain third-country undertakings)
Based on Article 40a of the Accounting Directive, where a third-country undertaking
that generates a net turnover of more than EUR 150 million in the Union (for each of
the last two consecutive financial years) has a subsidiary in the Union that is subject
to Articles 19a/29a Accounting Directive, or, in the absence of such subsidiary, a
branch in the Union that generated a net turnover of more than EUR 40 million (in the
preceding financial year), the subsidiary or the branch will have to publish and make
accessible sustainability information at the group level of the third-country parent
undertaking.
This sustainability report to be provided under Article 40a of the Accounting
Directive has a limited content compared to the “sustainability statement” to be
provided under Articles 19a/29a of the Accounting Directive. Certain information that
is required in the sustainability statement is not required in the sustainability report, in
particular information on resilience, opportunities, and risks, since the intention above
all is to focus the sustainability report on sustainability impacts52.
The sustainability report must comply with the following requirements:
− it must be prepared in accordance with the ESRS for certain third-country
undertakings adopted by way of Commission delegated acts53;
51 Article 5(2) third subparagraph Accounting Directive.
52 Article 40a(1) Accounting Directive: “[…] sustainability report covering the information specified in points
(a)(iii) to (a)(v), points (b) to (f) and, where appropriate, point (h) of Article 29a(2)”.
53 Articles 40a(2) first subparagraph and 40b Accounting Directive. The time limit for the Commission to adopt
the ESRS for certain third-country undertaking was postponed to 30 June 2026 by Directive (EU) 2024/1306 of
10− it must be subject to assurance54;
− it must be published by the relevant subsidiaries or branches established or
located in the Union together with the assurance opinion on the sustainability
report55.
If the third-country parent undertaking prepares the sustainability report in
compliance with the ESRS (instead of with the ESRS for certain third-country
undertakings), the subsidiary or branch does not need to prepare the sustainability
report in accordance with the ESRS for certain third-country undertakings. In this
case, the exemptions under Article 19a(9) and Article 29a(8) would apply.
These requirements must be complied with for each financial year beginning on or
after 1 January 202856.
Flowchart to identify the applicable sustainability reporting requirements for each type of
undertaking and the specific application date
The flowchart below illustrates the process to determine whether an entity is subject to
sustainability reporting requirements and from which financial year.
the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2024 amending Directive 2013/34/EU as regards the
time limits for the adoption of sustainability reporting standards for certain sectors and for certain third-country
undertakings (OJ L, 2024/1306, 8.5.2024).
54 Article 40a(3) Accounting Directive.
55 Article 40d Accounting Directive.
56 Article 5(2) second subparagraph CSRD: “Member States shall apply the measures necessary to comply with
point (14) of Article 1 for financial years starting on or after 1 January 2028.”
11Is the undertaking established in the EU?
YES NO Does the undertaking have securities admitted to
Is the undertaking a parent of a large group?
trading on an EU regulated market?
YES
YES NO NO
Is the undertaking a large undertaking?
Is the undertaking a Public Interest Entity (as YES NO
Does the undertaking have a net turnover
defined in Art. 2(1) Accounting Dir.) with
more than 500 employees at group level? Is the undertaking a Public Interest Entity (as Is the undertaking an SME (excluding micro
generated in the Union above EUR 150 million
defined in Art. 2(1) Accounting Dir.) with undertakings) with securities admitted to
and:
- Union subsidiaries that are either large
YES NO more than 500 employees? trading on an EU regulated market? undertakings or SMEs (excluding micro-
undertakings) with securities admitted to trading
YES NO YES NO
Consolidated Consolidated on an EU regulated market; or
sustainability sustainability statement - branches with net turnover generated in the
sta tement from FY from FY 2025 prepared Individual Individual Individual Undertaking Union above EUR 40 million?
sustainability sustainability sustainability not subject to
2 024 prepared in in accordance with
statement from FY statement from FY statement from FY sustainability
accordance with ESRS (Art. 29a
2024 prepared in 2025 prepared in 2026 prepared in reporting YES
ESRS (Art. 29a Accounting Dir. + Art. NO
accordance with accordance with accordance with
Accounting Dir. + 4(5) Transparency Dir.
Art. 4(5) if the parent
ESRS (Art. 19a ESRS (Art. 19a ESRS or LSME
Accounting Dir. + Accounting Dir. + ESRS Undertaking
Tr ansparency Dir. if undertaking has Union subsidiary or Union branch
Art. 4(5) Art. 4(5) (Art. 19a not subject to
u
ndth ere
t
p akar ine gn t
h as
sec tru ar dit ii ne gs a od nm anit t Eed
U
to
Transparency Dir. if Transparency Dir. if Accounting Dir. +
m rea pk oe rs
t
a (Ava ri tl .a 4b 0le
a
t Ah ce
c
s ou us nta tii nn ga b Dil ii rt .y
) sustainability
secu rities admitted to regulated market) the undertaking has the undertaking has Art. 4(5) from FY 2028 in accordance with reporting
securities admitted to securities admitted to Transparency Dir.)
trading on an EU >Possible exemptions: if ESRS for certain third countries
re gulated market) the parent undertaking is
trading on an EU trading on an EU > Possible opt out for
(Art 40a Accounting Dir.)
regulated market) regulated market) FYs 2026 and 2027
>P ossible exemptions: itself a subsidiary >Alternative option: the third-
>Possible exemptions: > Possible > Possible
if the parent undertaking (except for country undertaking prepares a
if the undertaking is a exemptions: if the exemptions: if the
undertaking is itself a large listed consolidated sustainability statement
subsidiary undertaking is a undertaking is a
subsidiary undertaking undertakings), an in accordance with ESRS. In this case
undertaking (except if subsidiary undertaking subsidiary
(except for large listed exemption is possible excemptions apply for the Union
it is listed), an (except if it is listed), undertaking, an
undertakings), an under Art. 29a(8) subsidiaries under Artt. 19a(9) and
exemption is possible an exemption is exemption is possible
exemption is possible Accounting Dir. 29a(8) Accounting Dir. (except for
under Art. 19a(9) possible under Art. under Article 19a(9)
under Art. 29a(8) large listed undertakings)
Accounting Dir. 19a(9) Accounting Accounting Dir.
Accounting Dir.
Dir.
➢ Micro-undertakings (Art. 3(1) Accounting Directive) = undertakings which on their balance sheet dates do not exceed the limits of at least two of the three following criteria: (a) balance sheet
total: EUR 450 000; (b) net turnover: EUR 900 000; (c) average number of employees during the financial year: 10.
➢ SMEs (Art. 3(1), (2) and (3) Accounting Directive) = undertakings which on their balance sheet dates do not exceed the limits of at least two of the three following criteria: (a) balance sheet total:
EUR 25 000 000; (b) net turnover: EUR 50 000 000; (c) average number of employees during the financial year: 250.
➢ Large undertakings (Art. 3(4) Accounting Directive) = undertakings which on their balance sheet dates exceed at least two of the three following criteria: (a) balance sheet total: EUR 25 000
000; (b) net turnover: EUR 50 000 000; (c) average number of employees during the financial year: 250. 12
➢ Large groups (Art. 3(7) Accounting Directive) = groups consisting of parent and subsidiary undertakings to be included in a consolidation and which, on a consolidated basis, exceed the limits of
at least two of the three following criteria on the balance sheet date of the parent undertaking: (a) balance sheet total: EUR 25 000 000; (b) net turnover: EUR 50 000 000; (c) average number of
employees during the financial year: 250.Timeline for the application of sustainability reporting requirements
The table below illustrates the different application dates for the different types of undertakings subject to sustainability reporting.
Financial year Financial year Financial year Financial year Financial year
2024 2025 2026 2027 2028
(reporting in 2025) (reporting in 2026) (reporting in 2027) (reporting in 2028) (reporting in 2029)
Large undertakings which are PIEs Individual Individual Individual Individual Individual
(including third-country issuers) > 500 sustainability sustainability sustainability sustainability sustainability
employees on average during the financial statement statement statement statement statement
year (ESRS) (ESRS) (ESRS) (ESRS) (ESRS)
PIEs (including third-country issuers) that Consolidated Consolidated Consolidated Consolidated Consolidated
are parent undertakings of a large group > sustainability sustainability sustainability sustainability sustainability
500 employees on average on a statement statement statement statement statement
consolidated basis during the financial year (ESRS) (ESRS) (ESRS) (ESRS) (ESRS)
Large undertakings (including third-country N/A Individual Individual Individual Individual
issuers) that are not “PIEs > 500 employees sustainability sustainability sustainability sustainability
on average during the financial year” statement statement statement statement
(ESRS) (ESRS) (ESRS) (ESRS)
Parent undertakings of a large group N/A Consolidated Consolidated Consolidated Consolidated
(including third-country issuers) that are not sustainability sustainability sustainability sustainability
“PIEs > 500 employees on average on a statement statement statement statement
consolidated basis during the financial (ESRS) (ESRS) (ESRS) (ESRS)
year”
Listed SMEs, SNCIs, captive (re)insurance N/A N/A Individual Individual Individual
undertakings (including third-country sustainability sustainability sustainability
issuers) statement statement statement
(ESRS or LSME (ESRS or LSME (ESRS or LSME
ESRS)* ESRS)* ESRS)
CSRD subsidiaries (or, in the absence, EU N/A N/A N/A N/A Sustainability report
branches with net turnover in the Union > (ESRS for certain
EUR 40 million) of third-country non-listed third-country
undertakings with net turnover in the Union undertakings or
> EUR 150 million ESRS)
* may opt out
13REQUIREMENTS FOR STATUTORY AUDITORS AND INDEPENDENT
ASSURANCE SERVICES PROVIDERS (IASPS)
1. Assurance of the sustainability information to be reported under Articles 19a and
29a Accounting Directive (sustainability statement)
Under Article 34(1) second subparagraph, point (aa) of the Accounting Directive, any
undertaking subject to sustainability reporting under Articles 19a and 29a of the
Accounting Directive must obtain an assurance opinion on the sustainability statement
included in their management report57.
From the first year of application of sustainability reporting requirements, this assurance
opinion must be based on a limited assurance engagement as regards the compliance of
the sustainability statement with the following requirements58:
− the sustainability reporting requirements provided for in the Accounting Directive
(including the compliance of the sustainability reporting with the ESRS adopted
pursuant to Articles 29b/29c of the Accounting Directive, the process carried out
by the undertaking to identify the information reported pursuant to those ESRS,
and the compliance with the requirement to mark-up sustainability reporting in
accordance with Article 29d of the Accounting Directive); and
− the reporting requirements provided for in Article 8 of the Taxonomy Regulation.
Based on Article 26a of the Audit Directive, the Commission is empowered to adopt
sustainability assurance standards for limited assurance by 1 October 202659.
The Commission is empowered to adopt sustainability assurance standards for
reasonable assurance by 1 October 2028, following an assessment to determine if
reasonable assurance is feasible for auditors and for undertakings60.
57 Article 34(1) second subparagraph, point (aa) Accounting Directive: “The statutory auditor(s) or audit firm(s)
shall also: […] (aa) where applicable, express an opinion based on a limited assurance engagement as regards
the compliance of the sustainability reporting with the requirements of this Directive […]”.
58 Article 34(1) second subparagraph, point (aa) Accounting Directive: “The statutory auditor(s) or audit firm(s)
shall also: […] (aa) where applicable, express an opinion based on a limited assurance engagement as regards
the compliance of the sustainability reporting with the requirements of this Directive, including the compliance
of the sustainability reporting with the sustainability reporting standards adopted pursuant to Article 29b or
Article 29c, the process carried out by the undertaking to identify the information reported pursuant to those
sustainability reporting standards, and the compliance with the requirement to mark up sustainability reporting
in accordance with Article 29d, and as regards the compliance with the reporting requirements provided for in
Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852; […]”
59 Article 26a(1) and (3) first subparagraph Audit Directive: “Member States shall require statutory auditors and
audit firms to carry out the assurance of sustainability reporting in compliance with the assurance standards
adopted by the Commission […]. The Commission shall, no later than 1 October 2026, adopt delegated acts
[…] in order to provide for limited assurance standards setting out the procedures that the auditor(s) and the
audit firm(s) shall perform in order to draw his, her or its conclusions on the assurance of sustainability
reporting, including engagement planning, risk consideration and response to risks and type of conclusions to
be included in the assurance report on sustainability reporting, or, where relevant, in the audit report […]”.
60 Article 26a(3) second subparagraph Audit Directive: “The Commission shall, no later than 1 October 2028,
adopt delegated acts […] in order to provide for reasonable assurance standards, following an assessment to
determine if reasonable assurance is feasible for auditors and for undertakings. Taking into account the results
of that assessment and if therefore appropriate, those delegated acts shall specify the date from which the
opinion referred to in point (aa) of the second subparagraph of Article 34(1) is to be based on a reasonable
assurance engagement that is based on those reasonable assurance standards.”.
14Pending the adoption by the Commission of assurance standards on this subject matter,
Member States may apply national assurance standards, procedures or requirements
covering that subject matter61.
Based on Article 34 of the Accounting Directive, the opinion on the sustainability
reporting may be expressed by the following categories of assurance providers:
− the statutory auditor auditing the financial statements of the relevant undertaking62;
− a statutory auditor other than the one auditing the financial statements (where
allowed by a Member State)63;
− an Independent Assurance Services Provider “IASP” (where allowed by a Member
State)64.
If a Member State decides to allow an IASP to express the assurance opinion on the
sustainability reporting, it shall also allow a statutory auditor other than the one(s)
carrying out the statutory audit of financial statements to do so65.
2. Assurance of the sustainability information to be reported under Article 40a of the
Accounting Directive (sustainability report for certain third-country undertakings)
Under Article 40a(3) first subparagraph of the Accounting Directive, the subsidiaries or
branches subject to sustainability reporting under Article 40a of the Accounting
Directive must obtain an assurance opinion on the sustainability report66. The third-
country parent undertaking is responsible for providing the assurance opinion on the
sustainability report to the relevant subsidiary or branch67.
This assurance opinion must concern the compliance of this sustainability report with the
relevant requirements set out in the Accounting Directive, including the compliance of
the sustainability report with the ESRS adopted pursuant to Article 40b of the
Accounting Directive.
61 Article 26a(2) first subparagraph Audit Directive: “Member States may apply national assurance standards,
procedures or requirements as long as the Commission has not adopted an assurance standard covering the
same subject matter.”.
62 Article 34(1) first subparagraph Accounting Directive: “Member States shall ensure that the financial
statements of public-interest entities, medium-sized and large undertakings are audited by one or more statutory
auditors or audit firms approved by Member States to carry out statutory audits on the basis of Directive
2006/43/EC.”
63 Article 34(3) Accounting Directive: “Member States may allow a statutory auditor or an audit firm other
than the one(s) carrying out the statutory audit of financial statements to express the opinion referred to in point
(aa) of the second subparagraph of paragraph 1.”
64 Article 34(4) first subparagraph Accounting Directive: “ […] Member States may allow an independent
assurance services provider established in their territory to express the opinion referred to in point (aa) of the
second subparagraph of paragraph 1 […].”
65 Article 34(4) sixth subparagraph Accounting Directive: “If a Member State, pursuant to the first
subparagraph, decides to allow an independent assurance services provider to express the opinion referred to
in point (aa) of the second subparagraph of paragraph 1, it shall also allow a statutory auditor other than the
one(s) carrying out the statutory audit of financial statements to do so, as provided for in paragraph 3.”
66 Article 40a(3) first subparagraph Accounting Directive: “Member States shall require that the sustainability
report referred to in paragraph 1 is published accompanied by an assurance opinion […]”.
67 Article 40a(3) second subparagraph Accounting Directive: “In the event that the third-country undertaking
does not provide the assurance opinion in accordance with the first subparagraph, the subsidiary undertaking
or branch shall issue a statement indicating that the third-country undertaking did not make the necessary
assurance opinion available.”
15This assurance opinion must be expressed by one or more person(s) or firm(s) authorised
to give an opinion on the assurance of sustainability reporting under the national law of
the third-country undertaking or of a Member State68.
3. Assurance providers: conditions to provide sustainability assurance
Where a statutory auditor or audit firm approved to carry out the audit of financial
statements within a Member State wishes to be approved to provide assurance on
sustainability reporting, it will have to comply with the national measures transposing the
relevant requirements set out in the Audit Directive as regards the assurance of
sustainability reporting.
These requirements cover in particular educational qualifications, examinations of
professional competence, tests of theoretical knowledge, practical training and
continuing education. Compliance with these requirements is not mandatory where the
statutory auditor or audit firm does not provide assurance on sustainability reporting.
Statutory auditors approved before 1 January 2026 – that were either approved before 1
January 2024 or that on 1 January 2024 were undergoing the approval process – that also
want to carry out sustainability assurance, do not have to comply with these
requirements, but still need to acquire the necessary knowledge through continuing
education69.
Independent Assurance Services Providers (IASPs) may provide assurance of
sustainability reporting where allowed by a Member State70 and under the following
conditions:
− The IASP is accredited for the assurance of sustainability reporting in accordance
with Regulation (EC) No 765/20087172; and
− the IASP complies with requirements equivalent to those set out in the Audit
Directive for statutory auditors in the Union to carry out the assurance of
sustainability reporting73. These requirements concern in particular: (a) training and
68 Article 40a(3) first subparagraph Accounting Directive: “Member States shall require that the sustainability
report referred to in paragraph 1 is published accompanied by an assurance opinion expressed by one or more
person(s) or firm(s) authorised to give an opinion on the assurance of sustainability reporting under the
national law of the third-country undertaking or of a Member State.”.
69 Article 14a of the Audit Directive.
70 Article 34(4) first subparagraph Accounting Directive.
71 Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 setting out the
requirements for accreditation and market surveillance relating to the marketing of products and repealing
Regulation (EEC) No 339/93 (OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 30).
72 Article 2 point (20) Accounting Directive: “‘independent assurance services provider’ means a conformity
assessment body accredited in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and
of the Council for the specific conformity assessment activity referred to in point (aa) of the second
subparagraph of Article 34(1) of this Directive.”
73 Article 34(4) first subparagraph Accounting Directive: “Member States may allow an independent assurance
services provider established in their territory to express the opinion referred to in point (aa) of the second
subparagraph of paragraph 1, provided that such independent assurance services provider is subject to
requirements that are equivalent to those set out in Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of
the Council as regards the assurance of sustainability reporting as defined in point 22 of Article 2 of that
Directive, in particular the requirements on: (a) training and examination, ensuring that independent assurance
services providers acquire the necessary expertise concerning sustainability reporting and the assurance of
sustainability reporting; (b) continuing education; (c) quality assurance systems; (d) professional ethics,
independence, objectivity, confidentiality and professional secrecy; (e) appointment and dismissal; (f)
investigations and sanctions; (g) the organisation of the work of the independent assurance services provider, in
16examination; (b) continuing education; (c) quality assurance systems; (d)
professional ethics, independence, objectivity, confidentiality and professional
secrecy; (e) appointment and dismissal; (f) investigations and sanctions; (g) the
organisation of the work of the independent assurance services provider, in
particular in terms of sufficient resources and personnel and the maintenance of
client account records and files; and (h) reporting irregularities.
From 6 January 2027, a Member State that allows IASPs to carry out assurance services
on sustainability reporting in its territory shall allow IASPs established in other Member
States to carry out the assurance of sustainability reporting in its territory74.
Third-country auditors and audit entities that provide sustainability assurance for
undertakings established in a third country with transferable securities admitted to
trading on the EU regulated market of a Member State must be registered in that Member
State75.
Section III – FAQs on sustainability information to be reported under Articles 19a/29a
of the Accounting Directive (individual and consolidated sustainability statement)
SCOPE AND APPLICATION DATES
1) Which financial year determines when an undertaking falls into a certain size-
category of undertakings: the financial year of the reporting year or the financial
year prior to the reporting year?
The rules to determine the size of an undertaking for sustainability reporting purposes
rely on the existing rules for financial reporting purposes applying to the undertaking
on the basis of the Member State in which it has its registered office76. These rules are
set out in the national measures transposing the preexisting Accounting Directive.
2) If an undertaking evolves during the course of a given financial year such that it
meets the criteria for inclusion in a different category of undertaking, is it
required to start reporting sustainability information according to the rules that
apply to that new category for that same financial year or only after the criteria
have been met for two consecutive financial years?
The rules to determine the size category of an undertaking for sustainability reporting
purposes, when that undertaking is evolving during the course of a given financial year,
particular in terms of sufficient resources and personnel and the maintenance of client account records and
files; and (h) reporting irregularities.
74 Article 34(5) first subparagraph Accounting Directive: “From 6 January 2027, a Member State that has made
use of the option provided for in paragraph 4 (the ‘host Member State’) shall allow independent assurance
services provider established in a Member State other than the host Member State (the ‘home Member State’) to
carry out the assurance of sustainability reporting.”
75 Article 45 Audit Directive.
76 In the case of undertakings with securities admitted to trading, the applicable financial reporting rules are
those of the Home Member State as defined in Article 2(1) point (i) of the Transparency Directive (i.e. the
Member State in which the undertaking has its registered office or one of the Member States where the
undertaking has its securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market).
17rely on the existing rules for financial reporting purposes (see also FAQ 1). These rules
are set out in the national measures transposing the preexisting Accounting Directive.
3) How is the average number of employees calculated for the purpose of the
undertaking’s categorisation under the Accounting Directive?
Union legislation does not regulate the calculation of the average number of employees
for the purpose of the undertaking’s categorisation under the Accounting Directive.
However, Member States may have adopted national rules or provided guidance on this
matter. In the absence of national rules or guidance, undertakings may use Article 5 of
Commission Recommendation of 6 May 2003 concerning the definition of micro, small
and medium-sized enterprises77 as guidance regarding the measurement of staff
headcount, as a proxy of an average number of employees: “[…]The headcount
corresponds to the number of annual work units (AWU), i.e. the number of persons who
worked full-time within the enterprise in question or on its behalf during the entire
reference year under consideration. The work of persons who have not worked the full
year, the work of those who have worked part-time, regardless of duration, and the
work of seasonal workers are counted as fractions of AWU. The staff consists of: (a)
employees; (b) persons working for the enterprise being subordinated to it and deemed
to be employees under national law; (c) owner-managers; (d) partners engaging in a
regular activity in the enterprise and benefiting from financial advantages from the
enterprise. Apprentices or students engaged in vocational training with an
apprenticeship or vocational training contract are not included as staff. The duration
of maternity or parental leaves is not counted.”
4) Are SMEs without transferable securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated
market required to report sustainability information under Articles 19a/29a of the
Accounting Directive?
SMEs without transferable securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market are
not required to report sustainability information at individual level under Article 19a of
the Accounting Directive (individual sustainability statement). They are however
required to report sustainability information at consolidated level under Article 29a of
the Accounting Directive (consolidated sustainability statement) if they are parent
undertakings of a large group78. Article 29a of the Accounting Directive applies
regardless of the size of the parent undertaking.
5) Are credit institutions and insurance undertakings required to report
sustainability information under Articles 19a and 29a of the Accounting Directive
regardless of their legal form?
Yes. Pursuant to Article 1(3) of the Accounting Directive, credit institutions79 and
insurance undertakings80, including cooperatives and mutual undertakings, are included
in the scope of Article 19a of the Accounting Directive (individual sustainability
77 Commission Recommendation of 6 May 2003 concerning the definition of micro, small and medium-sized
enterprises (OJ L 124, 20.5.2003, p. 36).
78 As defined in Article 3(7) Accounting Directive.
79 As defined in Article 4(1), point (1), of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the
Council.
80 Within the meaning of Article 2(1) of Council Directive 91/674/EEC.
18statement) regardless of their legal form if they are large undertakings or SMEs
(excluding micro-undertakings) with transferable securities admitted to trading on an
EU regulated market. They are also included in the scope of Article 29a of the
Accounting Directive (consolidated sustainability statement) regardless of their legal
form where they are the parent undertaking of a large group.
Pursuant to Article 1(3) point (b) second sentence of the Accounting Directive, Member
States may choose not to apply, wholly or in part, the sustainability reporting
requirements to specific credit institutions81.
6) Are financial institutions – other than insurance undertakings and credit
institutions – required to report sustainability information under Articles 19a/29a
of the Accounting Directive?
Yes. Financial institutions – other than insurance undertakings and credit institutions –
are included in the scope of Articles 19a and 29a of the Accounting Directive where
they meet both of the following requirements:
− They are undertakings incorporated as a type of undertaking listed in Annex I or II
of the Accounting Directive82;
− they are either large undertakings or SMEs (excluding micro-undertakings) with
transferable securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market (Article 19a
of the Accounting Directive) and/or parent undertakings of a large group (Article
29a of the Accounting Directive).
7) If a Small and Non-Complex Institution (SNCI) is currently required to report
non-financial information under Directive 2014/95/EU (NFRD), does it have to
continue reporting non-financial information in accordance with the provisions of
NFRD until the CSRD regime starts applying to small and non-complex
institutions (i.e. from financial years starting on or after 1 January 2026)?
Yes. Based on Article 5(2) of the CSRD, a small and non-complex institution that is a
large undertaking or an SME (excluding micro-undertakings) with transferable
securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market will be required to report
sustainability information in accordance with ESRS (or, alternatively, with LSME
ESRS) starting from financial year 2026. Therefore, a small and non-complex
institution that is currently required to report non-financial information under Article
19a of the Accounting Directive as introduced by Directive 2014/95/EU (NFRD)83 (i.e.
because, besides being a credit institution, it is also a large undertaking exceeding on its
balance sheet dates the criterion of an average number of 500 employees during the
financial year) would have to continue reporting under the NFRD regime until the
81 Article 1(3) point (b) second sentence Accounting Directive: “Member States may choose not to apply the
coordination measures referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph to the undertakings listed in
points (2) to (23) of Article 2(5) of Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council.”
82 Article 1(1) Accounting Directive: “1. The coordination measures prescribed by this Directive shall apply to
the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the types of undertakings
listed: (a) in Annex I; (b) in Annex II, where all of the direct or indirect members of the undertaking having
otherwise unlimited liability in fact have limited liability by reason of those members being undertakings which
are:(i) of the types listed in Annex I; or (ii) not governed by the law of a Member State but which have a legal
form comparable to those listed in Annex I. […]”.
83 Directive 2014/95/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 October 2014 amending Directive
2013/34/EU as regards disclosure of non-financial and diversity information by certain large undertakings and
groups (OJ L 330, 15.11.2014, p. 1).
19CSRD regime becomes applicable to small and non-complex institutions (i.e. from
financial year 2026).
8) If a Small and Non-Complex Institution (SNCI) is a parent company of a large
group, can that SNCI benefit from the derogation under Article 19a(6) of the
Accounting Directive and prepare sustainability reporting in accordance with
LSME ESRS?
If an undertaking (regardless of the size or the specific type, e.g. including SNCIs) is a
parent undertaking of a large group, it must publish a consolidated sustainability
statement under Article 29a of the Accounting Directive prepared in accordance with
ESRS. The possibility to use LSME ESRS in accordance with Article 19a(6) of the
Accounting Directive only applies to SMEs (excluding micro-undertakings) with
securities listed on an EU regulated market and to small and non-complex institutions,
captive insurance undertakings or captive reinsurance undertakings (provided they are
either large undertakings or SMEs - excluding micro-undertakings - with securities
listed on an EU regulated market for the preparation of their individual sustainability
statement. See also FAQ 10).
9) If a Small and Non-Complex Institution (SNCI) is a parent company of a large
group, when does it have to start reporting sustainability information?
If an SNCI is a parent undertaking of a large group, it must publish a consolidated
sustainability reporting using ESRS either from financial year 2024 (if the SNCI is a
Public Interest Entity exceeding on its balance sheet date, on a consolidated basis, an
average number of 500 employees during the financial year) or from financial year
2025 (in all other cases).
10) If an SNCI is a parent undertaking of a large group but is not required to issue
consolidated financial statements due to all its subsidiaries being immaterial, is
this SNCI still required to prepare and publish a consolidated sustainability
statement?
No. Article 29a of the Accounting Directive applies to parent undertakings of large
groups. However, if a parent undertaking of a large group is exempted from preparing
and publishing consolidated financial statements based on Article 23(10) of the
Accounting Directive (i.e. because it only has subsidiary undertakings which are
immaterial, both individually and collectively, or because all its subsidiary
undertakings can be excluded from consolidation by virtue of Article 23(9) of the
Accounting Directive), that parent undertaking is not required to prepare and publish a
consolidated sustainability statement. However, to the extent that such parent
undertaking is itself a large undertaking as defined in Article 3(4) of the Accounting
Directive and would therefore fall within the scope of Article 19a of the Accounting
Directive, that undertaking must prepare and publish an individual sustainability
statement in accordance with Article 19a of the Accounting Directive. This individual
sustainability statement must consider its subsidiaries when reporting about its value
chain in accordance with ESRS.
2011) Are Undertakings for Collective Investments in Transferable Securities (UCITS)
and Alternative Investment Funds (AIFs) required to report sustainability
information under Articles 19a and 29a of the Accounting Directive?
No. Based on Article 1(4) of the Accounting Directive, UCITS and AIFs are exempted
from reporting sustainability information under the Accounting Directive even if these
financial products are in the scope of the Accounting Directive84.
12) Are undertakings that manage Collective Investments in Transferable Securities
(UCITS) and Alternative Investment Funds (AIFs) required to report
sustainability information under Articles 19a and 29a of the Accounting
Directive?
Article 1(4) of the Accounting Directive aims to exclude UCITS and AIFs from the
sustainability reporting requirements under Articles 19a and 29a of the Accounting
Directive.
However, undertakings that manage UCITS and AIFs would fall under the scope of the
sustainability reporting obligations under Articles 19a and 29a of the Accounting
Directive if they fulfil the legal form conditions under Article 1(1) of the Accounting
Directive, and if they meet the company size criteria under Articles 19a and 29a of the
Accounting Directive.
13) Are Exchange-Traded Funds (ETFs) and Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs)
required to report sustainability information under Articles 19a and 29a of the
Accounting Directive?
As regards ETFs, since these financial products are established as Collective
Investments in Transferable Securities (UCITS) or Alternative Investment Funds
(AIFs), the same exemption applicable to UCITS and AIFs applies (see FAQ 11). As
regards listed REITs, to the extent that they meet the conditions of Article 4(1)(a) of
Directive 2011/61/EU85 to qualify as AIFs, the same exemption applicable to AIFs
applies (see FAQ 11).
14) Are pension funds required to report sustainability information under Articles
19a and 29a of the Accounting Directive?
If a pension fund is incorporated as a type of undertaking listed in Annex I or II of the
Accounting Directive86 and falls under the scope of Articles 19a and 29a of the
Accounting Directive, it will have to include in its management report a sustainability
statement. Unlike Collective Investments in Transferable Securities (UCITS) or
Alternative Investment Funds (AIFs), pension funds are not covered by the exclusion
from the sustainability reporting requirements set out in Article 1(4) of the Accounting
Directive.
84 Article 1(4) Accounting Directive: “The coordination measures prescribed by Articles 19a, 29a and 29d shall
not apply to financial products listed in points (b) [i.e. UICTS] and (f) [i.e. AIFs] of point (12) of Article 2 of
Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 of the European Parliament and of the Council [i.e. SFDR] “.
85 Directive 2011/61/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2011 on Alternative
Investment Fund Managers and amending Directives 2003/41/EC and 2009/65/EC and Regulations (EC) No
1060/2009 and (EU) No 1095/2010 (OJ L 174, 1.7.2011, p. 1).
86 Article 1(1) of the Accounting Directive.
2115) Is the sustainability statement published within the management report by an
issuer of transferable securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market to
be considered as “regulated information” as per Article 2(1) point (k) of the
Transparency Directive?
Yes. Article 2(1) point (k) of the Transparency Directive defines regulated information
as, inter alia, “all information which the issuer, or any other person who has applied for
the admission of securities to trading on a regulated market without the issuer's
consent, is required to disclose under this Directive [i.e. the Transparency Directive]
[…]”. Article 4(5) of the Transparency Directive requires issuers to disclose a
sustainability statement, which is therefore to be considered as “regulated information”.
16) Which companies may opt out of the obligation to report sustainability
information for financial years starting before 1 January 2028 pursuant to Article
19a(7) of the Accounting Directive?
Based on Article 19a(7) of the Accounting Directive, SMEs (excluding micro-
undertakings) with transferable securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated
market may decide not to report sustainability information under Article 19a of the
Accounting Directive for financial years starting before 1 January 2028 (e.g. for
financial years 2026 and 2027). In such cases, the SME shall, nevertheless, briefly state
in its management report why the sustainability reporting was not provided.
This opt-out also applies to small and non-complex institutions, as well as to captive
insurance and reinsurance undertakings, provided they are SMEs (excluding micro-
undertakings) with transferable securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated
market.
EXEMPTION RULES
17) If a parent undertaking reports sustainability information at consolidated level
under Article 29a of the Accounting Directive (consolidated sustainability
statement), does it have to report information on key performance indicators in
accordance with Article 19(1) third subparagraph of the Accounting Directive in
its consolidated management report?
No. Article 19(1) third subparagraph of the Accounting Directive87, which regulates the
individual management report, requires the disclosure of information on key
performance indicators within the individual management report. Article 29(1) of the
Accounting Directive88, which regulates the consolidated management report, requires
87 Article 19(1) third subparagraph Accounting Directive: “To the extent necessary for an understanding of the
undertaking's development, performance or position, the analysis shall include both financial and, where
appropriate, non-financial key performance indicators relevant to the particular business, including
information relating to environmental and employee matters. In providing the analysis, the management report
shall, where appropriate, include references to, and additional explanations of, amounts reported in the annual
financial statements.”
88 Article 29(1) Accounting Directive: “The consolidated management report shall, as a minimum, in addition to
any other information required under other provisions of this Directive, set out the information required by
Articles 19 and 20, taking account of the essential adjustments resulting from the particular characteristics of a
22that the consolidated management report sets out, as a minimum, the information
required by Articles 19 and 20 of the Accounting Directive. Since Article 29a(7) of the
Accounting Directive89 exempts undertakings from disclosing information on key
performance indicators in the context of their individual management report (as
required by Article 19(1) third subparagraph Accounting Directive) where they have
complied with Article 29a(1) to (5), and since the contents of the consolidated
management report according to Article 29(1) shall also include the information
required under Article 19(1), the exemption would also apply to the undertaking’s
consolidated management report under Article 29a.
18) If an SME with securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market chooses
to voluntarily prepare and publish a consolidated sustainability statement under
Article 29a Accounting Directive, shall it be exempted from preparing and
publishing its individual sustainability statement under Article 19a Accounting
Directive?
Yes. An SME with securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market that
voluntarily publishes the consolidated sustainability statement referred to in Article 29a
of the Accounting Directive shall be exempted from preparing and publishing the
individual sustainability statement referred to in Article 19a of the Accounting
Directive, provided that the consolidated sustainability statement is prepared in
compliance with ESRS.
19) What are the conditions for a subsidiary undertaking in the scope of Articles
19a/29a of the Accounting Directive to be exempted from reporting sustainability
information under Articles 19a/29a of the Accounting Directive (sustainability
statement)?
According to Articles 19a(9) and 29a(8) of the Accounting Directive, an undertaking
which is a subsidiary undertaking shall be exempted from the obligations set out in
Article 19a(1) to (4) of the Accounting Directive (or Article 29a(1) to (5) of the
Accounting Directive if the subsidiary is itself an intermediate parent undertaking of a
large group) if such undertaking and its subsidiary undertakings are included in the
consolidated management report of a parent undertaking drawn up in accordance with
Articles 29 and 29a of the Accounting Directive (or in the consolidated sustainability
reporting of a third-country parent undertaking carried out in accordance with ESRS or
in a manner equivalent to those ESRS).
This exemption is subject to all the conditions listed in Article 19a(9) second
subparagraph of the Accounting Directive (or Article 29a(8) second subparagraph of
the Accounting Directive if the subsidiary is itself an intermediate parent undertaking
of a large group). In particular, the management report of the exempted undertaking
must contain: the name and registered office of the parent undertaking that reports the
information at group level; weblink(s) to the consolidated management report or
consolidated sustainability reporting of the parent undertaking; and the information that
the undertaking is exempted from the obligation to publish the individual sustainability
consolidated management report as compared to a management report in a way which facilitates the
assessment of the position of the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole.”
89 Article 29a(7) Accounting Directive: “A parent undertaking that complies with the requirements set out in
paragraphs 1 to 5 of this Article shall be deemed to have complied with the requirements set out in the third
subparagraph of Article 19(1) and Article 19a”.
23statement (or the consolidated sustainability statement, if the subsidiary is itself an
intermediate parent undertaking of a large group). If the parent undertaking is
established in a third country, its consolidated sustainability reporting and the assurance
opinion must be published in accordance with the law of the Member State by which
the subsidiary undertaking is governed, and the disclosures laid down in Article 8 of the
Taxonomy Regulation (covering the activities carried out by the subsidiary
undertaking) must be included either in the management report of the subsidiary
undertaking or in the consolidated sustainability reporting carried out by the third-
country parent undertaking.
If a Member State requires that a translation of the consolidated management report or
the consolidated sustainability reporting of the parent undertaking is provided, such
translation should either be certified (e.g. by the translator or by the authority in charge
of certifying translations of the relevant Member State), or include a statement
specifying that it was not certified.
Under Articles 19a(10) and 29a(9) of the Accounting Directive, large undertakings with
securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market – including where they are
small and non-complex institutions, captive insurance undertakings and captive
reinsurance undertakings and including where they are third-country undertakings –
cannot avail of this exemption.
20) Does the consolidated management report/consolidated sustainability reporting of
the parent undertaking have to be already published when its subsidiary publishes
its own management report in order for the subsidiary to be exempted from
publishing its own sustainability statement?
No. For the subsidiary undertaking to be exempted from publishing its own
sustainability statement in accordance with Articles 19a(9) or 29a(8) of the Accounting
Directive, the management report that the subsidiary undertaking publishes must
contain a weblink to the consolidated management report or consolidated sustainability
reporting of the parent undertaking90. Where that consolidated management report or
consolidated sustainability reporting is not yet available at the time of publication of the
subsidiary undertaking’s management report, the subsidiary undertaking claiming the
exemption can make reference in its management report to a general weblink at which
the relevant documents will be available in the future. The Union subsidiary could
consider, for instance, obtaining from the parent undertaking a declaration that it
guarantees the commitments entered into by the subsidiary undertaking and publishing
that declaration together with its management report within the deadline set by its own
Member State.
90 Article 19a(9) second subparagraph, point (a), point (ii) and Article 29a(8) second subparagraph, point (a),
point (ii) Accounting Directive: “the weblinks to the consolidated management report of the parent undertaking
or, where applicable, to the consolidated sustainability reporting of the parent undertaking, as referred to in the
first subparagraph of this paragraph, and to the assurance opinion referred to in point (aa) of the second
subparagraph of Article 34(1) of this Directive or to the assurance opinion referred to in point (b) of this
subparagraph”.
2421) Does the consolidated management report or the consolidated sustainability
reporting of the parent undertaking have to be available in a language accepted by
the Member State by whose national law the subsidiary undertaking is governed
in order for the subsidiary to be exempted from publishing its own sustainability
statement?
The Member State by whose national law the subsidiary undertaking is governed may
require that the consolidated management report (or, where applicable, the consolidated
sustainability reporting of the parent undertaking) is published in a language that such
Member State accepts, and that any necessary translation into such language is
provided. In this case, these requirements must be met in order for the subsidiary
undertaking to be exempted from publishing its own sustainability statement91.
22) How should the exempted subsidiary report the fact that it is exempted?
Based on Articles 19a(9) and 29a(8) of the Accounting Directive, the exempted
subsidiary must include in its management report the information that it is exempted
from the obligation to publish an individual sustainability statement (or a consolidated
sustainability statement, if the subsidiary is itself an intermediate parent undertaking of
a large group)92.
23) Should the management report of the exempted subsidiary be in a specific
publication format?
Where a subsidiary avails of the exemption in Article 19a(9) or 29a(8) of the
Accounting Directive, the general rules on the publication of the management report
apply, including the obligation to submit the management report to the national
Business Register pursuant to Article 30 of the Accounting Directive in conjunction
with the provisions in Chapter III of title I of the Company Law Directive. The digital
requirements for sustainability reporting set out in Article 29d of the Accounting
Directive do not apply. Where the subsidiary availing of the exemption in Article
19a(9) or 29a(8) of the Accounting Directive has transferable securities admitted to
trading on an EU regulated market, it will also have to comply with the general
requirements set out by Article 4 of the Transparency Directive for the publication of
the management report within the annual financial report (i.e. use of the European
Single Electronic Format (ESEF) established by the ESEF Delegated Regulation and
publication of the annual financial report within four months from the end of the
financial year).
24) Can large undertakings admitted to trading on an EU regulated market avail of
the exemptions under Articles 19a(9) and 29a(8) of the Accounting Directive?
No. Under Articles 19a(10) and 29a(9) of the Accounting Directive, large undertakings
with transferable securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market – including
where they are small and non-complex institutions, captive insurance undertakings and
captive reinsurance undertakings and including where they are third-country
91 Articles 19a(9) third subparagraph and 29a(8) third subparagraph Accounting Directive.
92 Article 19a(9) second subparagraph, point (a), point (iii) and Article 29a(8) second subparagraph, point (a),
point (iii) Accounting Directive: “the information that the undertaking is exempted from the obligations set out
in paragraphs 1 to 4 of this Article”.
25undertakings – cannot be exempted from reporting sustainability information. They will
therefore have to report sustainability information pursuant to Article 4(5) of the
Transparency Directive and to Articles 19a/29a of the Accounting Directive.
25) How can an undertaking comply with the obligation to prepare and publish an
individual or a consolidated sustainability statement when it is not required to
prepare and publish an individual or a consolidated management report?
An undertaking that must report sustainability information and that is not required to
prepare and publish an individual or a consolidated management report may publish the
individual or consolidated sustainability statement in a separate document. This
principle also applies to the consolidated sustainability reporting of a third-country
parent undertaking for its subsidiaries to be exempted under Articles 19a(9) and 29a(8)
of the Accounting Directive.
However, that separate document – which includes the individual or consolidated
sustainability statement – must comply with the format and the mark-up requirements
set out in Article 29d of the Accounting Directive93.
26) How can an undertaking comply with the obligation to prepare and publish a
consolidated sustainability statement when it is exempted from preparing
consolidated financial statements?
An undertaking that must prepare and publish a consolidated sustainability statement
without having to prepare and publish the corresponding consolidated financial
statements will need to include in the consolidated sustainability statement the financial
information necessary to understand the undertaking’s impacts on sustainability matters
and to understand how sustainability matters affect the undertaking’s development,
performance and position94.
ESRS
27) Which set of European Sustainability Reporting Standards (ESRS) shall
undertakings use for the preparation of the sustainability information under
Articles 19a and 29a of the Accounting Directive?
93 Article 29d Accounting Directive: “1. Undertakings subject to the requirements of Article 19a of this
Directive shall prepare their management report in the electronic reporting format specified in Article 3 of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/815 ( 26 ) and shall mark up their sustainability reporting,
including the disclosures provided for in Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852, in accordance with the
electronic reporting format specified in that Delegated Regulation. 2. Parent undertakings subject to the
requirements of Article 29a shall prepare their consolidated management report in the electronic reporting
format specified in Article 3 of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/815 and shall mark up their sustainability
reporting, including the disclosures provided for in Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852, in accordance with
the electronic reporting format specified in that Delegated Regulation.”
94 This reasoning is based on Article 19a(3) third subparagraph and Article 29a(3) third subparagraph
Accounting Directive: “Where applicable, the information referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall also contain
references to, and additional explanations of, the other information included in the management report in
accordance with Article 19, and the amounts reported in the annual financial statements.”. “Where applicable”
is meant to refer to the situations where financial statements are not being prepared and published by the
undertaking.
26All undertakings falling within the scope of Articles 19a and 29a of the Accounting
Directive shall use, by default, the ESRS adopted under Article 29b of the Accounting
Directive (ESRS). The first set of ESRS was adopted by the European Commission via
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2772 of 31 July 2023.
For the preparation of the individual sustainability statement under Article 19a of the
Accounting Directive, SMEs (excluding micro-undertakings) with transferable
securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market, as well as small and non-
complex institutions, captive insurance undertakings and captive reinsurance
undertakings, may alternatively use the proportionate ESRS that will be adopted
pursuant to Article 29c of the Accounting Directive (LSME ESRS). See also FAQ 28.
28) Which undertakings may use LSME ESRS to prepare their individual
sustainability statement as an alternative to the ESRS adopted under Article 29b
of the Accounting Directive?
The undertakings that may use LSME ESRS to prepare their individual sustainability
statement are:
− SMEs (excluding micro undertakings) with transferable securities admitted to
trading on an EU regulated market;
− small and non-complex institutions95, provided that they are either (i) large
undertakings; or (ii) SMEs (excluding micro undertakings) with transferable
securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market;
− captive insurance undertakings96 provided they are either: (i) large undertakings; or
(ii) SMEs (excluding micro undertakings) with transferable securities admitted to
trading on an EU regulated market; and
− captive reinsurance undertakings97 provided they are either: (i) large undertakings;
or (ii) SMEs (excluding micro undertakings) with securities admitted to trading on
an EU regulated market.
VALUE CHAIN
95 Defined in point (145) of Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 as “an institution that meets all the
following conditions: (a) it is not a large institution; (b) the total value of its assets on an individual basis or,
where applicable, on a consolidated basis in accordance with this Regulation and Directive 2013/36/EU is on
average equal to or less than the threshold of EUR 5 billion over the four-year period immediately preceding the
current annual reporting period; Member States may lower that threshold; (c) it is not subject to any obligations,
or is subject to simplified obligations, in relation to recovery and resolution planning in accordance with Article
4 of Directive 2014/59/EU; (d) its trading book business is classified as small within the meaning of Article
94(1); (e) the total value of its derivative positions held with trading intent does not exceed 2 % of its total on-
and off-balance-sheet assets and the total value of its overall derivative positions does not exceed 5 %, both
calculated in accordance with Article 273a(3); (f) more than 75 % of both the institution's consolidated total
assets and liabilities, excluding in both cases the intragroup exposures, relate to activities with counterparties
located in the European Economic Area; (g) the institution does not use internal models to meet the prudential
requirements in accordance with this Regulation except for subsidiaries using internal models developed at the
group level, provided that the group is subject to the disclosure requirements laid down in Article 433a or 433c
on a consolidated basis; (h) the institution has not communicated to the competent authority an objection to
being classified as a small and non-complex institution; (i) the competent authority has not decided that the
institution is not to be considered a small and non-complex institution on the basis of an analysis of its size,
interconnectedness, complexity or risk profile”. These institutions may fall within the definition of large
undertakings if they meet the thresholds under Article 3(7) of the Accounting Directive.
96 Defined in point (2) of Article 13 of Directive 2009/138/EC.
97 Defined in point (5) of Article 13 of Directive 2009/138/EC.
2729) ESRS require undertakings to use estimates if they cannot obtain all necessary
value chain information after having made reasonable efforts to do so (ESRS 1,
General requirements, paragraph 69). What constitutes “reasonable effort”?
The concept of “reasonable effort” is used to determine when an undertaking shall
report an estimate of value chain information instead of reporting information collected
from actors in its value chain.
Paragraph 65 of ESRS 1 (General requirements) sets out the purpose of including value
chain information in the sustainability statement. It states that “the undertaking shall
include material value chain information when this is necessary to: (a) allow users of
sustainability statements to understand the undertaking’s material impacts, risks and
opportunities; and/or (b) produce a set of information that meets the qualitative
characteristics of information (see Appendix B of this Standard)”.
Paragraph 68 of ESRS 1 (General requirements) states: “The undertaking’s ability to
obtain the necessary upstream and downstream value chain information may vary
depending on various factors, such as the undertaking’s contractual arrangements, the
level of control that it exercises on the operations outside the consolidation scope and
its buying power. When the undertaking does not have the ability to control the
activities of its upstream and/or downstream value chain and its business relationships,
obtaining value chain information may be more challenging.”
Paragraph 69 of ESRS 1 (General requirements) states: “There are circumstances
where the undertaking cannot collect the information about its upstream and
downstream value chain as required by paragraph 63 after making reasonable efforts
to do so. In these circumstances, the undertaking shall estimate the information to be
reported about its upstream and downstream value chain, by using all reasonable and
supportable information, such as sector-average data and other proxies.”
Paragraph 70 of ESRS 1 (General requirements) recognises that it may be challenging
to obtain value chain information when the relevant actor in the value chain is an SME
or another undertaking that is itself not subject to the reporting requirements of the
Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive.
Paragraph 71 of ESRS 1 (General requirements) makes a distinction between reporting
on policies, actions and targets, and reporting on metrics. With regard to policies,
actions and targets, it states that the undertaking shall report value chain information
“to the extent that those policies, actions and targets involve actors in the value chain”.
With reference to metrics, it states that “in many cases, in particular for environmental
matters for which proxies are available, the undertaking may be able to comply with
the reporting requirements without collecting data from the actors in its upstream and
downstream value chain, especially from SMEs, for example, when calculating the
undertaking’s GHG Scope 3 emissions”.
Paragraph 72 clarifies that: “The incorporation of estimates made using sector-average
data or other proxies shall not result in information that does not meet the qualitative
characteristics of information (see chapter 2 and section 7.2 Sources of estimation and
outcome uncertainty of this Standard).”
28The undertaking should determine reasonable effort as referred to in paragraph 69 of
ESRS 1 (General requirements) taking into consideration its specific facts and
circumstances as well as the conditions of the external environment in which it
operates. What constitutes reasonable effort is therefore likely to vary from undertaking
to undertaking.
It is expected that undertakings will more frequently have recourse to the use of
estimates in the first years of application of the reporting requirements and that the use
of estimates will become less common as the ability of undertakings and the actors in
their value chains to share sustainability information improves over time.
In all cases the undertaking should consider whether the use of estimates is likely to
affect the quality of the reported information. The use of estimates could, in some
circumstances, enhance the quality of reported information, for example if it helps to
ensure that information about the impacts, risks and opportunities is neutral, or if the
collected information would not be of the appropriate reliability. In these circumstances
the use of estimates would contribute to a more faithful representation of the
phenomena that the information purports to represent and the reporting undertaking is
therefore more likely to use estimates. In other circumstances the use of estimates could
reduce the quality of the reported information, for example if it results in information
that is less accurate and/or less complete and therefore results in a less faithful
representation of the phenomena that it purports to represent.
When considering the specific facts and circumstances of the undertaking and the
conditions of the external environment in which it operates in order to determine
reasonable effort, the following criteria could offer useful guidance. Any one of these
criteria could on its own be sufficient to determine that reasonable effort has been
made, or the criteria could be applied in combination.
− The size and resources of the reporting undertaking in relation the scale and
complexity of its value chain. What constitutes reasonable effort for a larger,
well-resourced undertaking might not be considered reasonable for a smaller,
typically less well-resourced undertaking. The size and resources of the
undertaking should also be considered in relation to the scale and complexity of its
value chain. For example, what constitutes reasonable effort for a larger
undertaking with a large number of suppliers for multiple different products, and/or
with supply chains that comprise many tiers, might be considered unreasonable for
a smaller undertaking with a similarly complex value chain.
− The technical readiness of the reporting undertaking to collect value chain
information. For example, what constitutes reasonable effort for a very large
undertaking with substantial prior experience of collecting sustainability
information from actors in its value chain might not be considered reasonable in
the case of a smaller undertaking with no such prior experience. The technical
readiness of undertakings to collect value chain information is expected to improve
over time.
− The availability of tools to access and share value-chain information. What
constitutes reasonable effort may be influenced by the availability of efficient and
commonly used tools, including digital tools, to share value chain information
between undertakings. The availability of such tools is likely to be limited in the
first years of applying the ESRS but should improve over time, including as a
result of the voluntary SME sustainability reporting standards currently being
developed by EFRAG (VSME). This means that undertakings are more likely to
29have recourse to the use of estimates in the first years of applying the ESRS than
they will do in later reporting cycles.
− The size and resources of the actor in the value chain. What constitutes
reasonable effort may be influenced by the size and resources of the actor in the
value chain from which information is expected. SMEs in particular may not have
the necessary resources to easily and quickly provide the information that may be
of interest to the reporting undertaking, which in turn makes it harder for the
reporting undertaking to gather the necessary value chain information from SMEs.
Where the value chain actor is an SME, the reporting undertaking is therefore more
likely to have recourse to the use of estimates. In general, the application of
reasonable effort by the reporting undertaking should not result in expectations on
the actor in the value chain to apply unreasonable effort.
− The technical readiness of the actor in the value chain. What constitutes
reasonable effort may be influenced by the technical readiness of the actor in the
value chain to provide sustainability information. The technical readiness of actors
in the value chain should improve over time, which implies that undertakings are
more likely to have recourse to the use of estimates in the first years of applying
the ESRS than they will do in later reporting cycles.
− Level of influence and buying power. What constitutes reasonable effort may be
influenced by the existing level of control of the reporting undertaking over the
actor in the value chain and by the relative buying power of the reporting
undertaking compared to other undertakings. For example, less effort may be
required to obtain information from an actor in the value chain that is partly owned
by the reporting undertaking or that generates a high proportion of its own turnover
through sales to the reporting undertaking. This means that undertakings are more
likely to have recourse to the use of estimates in the case of actors in the value
chain which they do not partly own or for which they only represent a small
proportion of turnover.
− Connected to the level of influence, the ‘proximity’ of the actor in the value
chain. The ‘proximity’ of the actor in the value chain to the reporting undertaking
may be a consideration in determining what constitutes reasonable effort, since less
effort is usually required to obtain information from a tier 1 supplier or a direct
customer than from other actors in the value chain. This means that undertakings
are more likely to have recourse to the use of estimates in the case of actors in the
value chain that are not tier 1 suppliers or direct customers.
30) What should an SME expect to receive in terms of requests for sustainability
information as a consequence of the CSRD and ESRS?
Paragraphs 132 and 133 of ESRS 1 (General requirements) set out transitional
provisions that limit the value chain information that undertakings within the scope of
the CSRD have to report and/or collect from actors in their value chain during the first
3 years.98 The extent to which SMEs are asked to provide sustainability information by
98 Paragraph 132: “For the first 3 years of the undertaking’s sustainability reporting under the ESRS, in the
event that not all the necessary information regarding its upstream and downstream value chain is available,
the undertaking shall explain the efforts made to obtain the necessary information about its upstream and
downstream value chain, the reasons why not all of the necessary information could be obtained, and its plans
to obtain the necessary information in the future.” Paragraph 133: “For the first 3 years of its sustainability
reporting under the ESRS, in order to take account of the difficulties that undertakings may encounter in
gathering information from actors throughout their value chain and in order to limit the burden for SMEs in the
30undertakings as a consequence of the CSRD and ESRS will, during the first 3 years of
implementation, be strongly influenced by whether undertakings that fall within the
scope of CSRD make use of these transitional provisions regarding value chain
reporting.
Notwithstanding the transitional provisions referred to above, SMEs should expect
undertakings that fall under the scope of CSRD to apply “reasonable effort” to collect
from actors in their value chains the information they need in order to comply with
ESRS. In accordance with the answer to the previous question, the size and resources,
the technical readiness and the proximity of the actor in the value chain are among the
criteria that can be used to establish what constitutes “reasonable effort”. Therefore,
smaller SMEs that have never voluntarily reported sustainability information, that are
not connected with severe negative impacts and are not 1st tier suppliers or customers of
undertakings that fall within the scope of the CSRD should, at least during the first
years of application of the reporting requirements, be less exposed to expectations to
have and share sustainability information. Larger SMEs that have previously reported
sustainability information (for example because they apply EMAS or other
environmental or sustainability certification or reporting schemes) and SMEs that are
1st tier suppliers or customers of undertakings that fall within the scope of the CSRD
may be exposed to higher expectations to have and share sustainability information.
EFRAG is currently developing two sustainability reporting standards for SMEs: a
mandatory one for listed SMEs (LSME ESRS) and a voluntary one for non-listed
SMEs (VSME). LSME ESRS will establish the maximum level of sustainability
information that ESRS can require an undertaking that falls within the scope of the
CSRD to obtain from SMEs in its value chain. VSME will be designed to become a
reference point for all actors in the market, to ensure that the reporting effort of CSRD
and non-CSRD undertakings is proportionate.
31) Until when does the transitional period for the disclosure of information in the
value chain apply? Should the commencement date for the three-year transitional
period be different for each type of undertaking?
Chapter 10.2 of ESRS 1 sets out transitional provisions related to chapter 5 on value
chains. The transitional period for the disclosure of information required from the value
chain applies for the first 3 financial years of application of the reporting requirements,
for each undertaking. For example, if an undertaking falls within the scope of Articles
19a or 29a of the Accounting Directive as of financial year 2024, then it may avail of
the transitional period for value chain reporting for financial years 2024, 2025 and
2026.
ARTICLE 8 TAXONOMY REGULATION DISCLOSURES
value chain: (a) when disclosing information on policies, actions and targets in accordance with ESRS2 and
other ESRS, the undertaking may limit upstream and downstream value chain information to information
available in-house, such as data already available to the undertaking and publicly available information; and
(b) when disclosing metrics, the undertaking is not required to include upstream and downstream value chain
information, except for datapoints derived from other EU legislation, as listed in ESRS 2 Appendix B.”
3132) Do undertakings have to include Article 8 Taxonomy Regulation disclosures in
their sustainability statement?
Yes, undertakings in the scope of Articles 19a or 29a of the Accounting Directive must
include Article 8 Taxonomy Regulation disclosures in their sustainability statements.
33) If an SME with transferable securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated
market avails of the 2-year opt-out from sustainability reporting until 2028, does it
have to still include Article 8 Taxonomy disclosures in its management report?
No. Article 8 Taxonomy Regulation applies to all undertakings required to prepare and
publish a sustainability statement under Articles 19a and 29a of the Accounting
Directive. However, if an SME (excluding micro-undertakings) with transferable
securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market decides not to include in its
management report the sustainability statement under Article 19a(7) of the Accounting
Directive – where Article 8 Taxonomy Regulation disclosures would need to be
included – it is not required to disclose Article 8 Taxonomy Regulation disclosures.
34) Are undertakings required to include in their management report the information
to be disclosed under Article 8 Taxonomy Regulation even if they are exempted
from preparing and publishing their sustainability statement under Article 19a(9)
and 29a(8) of the Accounting Directive?
Yes, but only if the parent undertaking is established in a third country and Article 8
Taxonomy Regulation disclosures are not included in the parent’s consolidated
sustainability reporting. Where the undertaking avails of the exemption from the
obligation to disclose a sustainability statement under Articles 19a(9) or 29a(8) of the
Accounting Directive, if the parent undertaking is established in a third country, Article
8 Taxonomy Regulation disclosures, covering the activities carried out by the exempted
subsidiary undertaking established in the Union and its subsidiary undertakings, must
be included in the management report of the exempted subsidiary undertaking, or in the
consolidated sustainability reporting carried out by the parent undertaking established
in a third country99.
LANGUAGE REQUIREMENTS
35) In which language should the sustainability statement be drafted and published?
Undertakings subject to Articles 19a and 29a of the Accounting Directive should
publish the management report (including the sustainability statement), together with
the opinion and statement submitted by the statutory auditor or audit firm referred to in
Article 34 Accounting Directive, in accordance with Article 30(1) of the Accounting
Directive, which refers to the laws laid down by each Member State in accordance with
Chapter III of Title 1 of the Company Law Directive. In particular, Article 21 of the
Company Law Directive clarifies that “1. Documents and particulars to be disclosed
pursuant to Article 14 shall be drawn up and filed in one of the languages permitted by
the language rules applicable in the Member State in which the file referred to in
99 Articles 19a(9) second subparagraph, point (c) Accounting Directive.
32Article 16(1) is opened”. Therefore, the language that undertakings shall use to publish
the sustainability statement included in the management report must be a language
specified by the laws of the relevant Member State adopted in accordance with Article
21 of the Company Law Directive.
If an undertaking subject to Articles 19a and 29a of the Accounting Directive has
securities listed on an EU regulated market, it will also have to comply with the
disclosure obligations set out in the Transparency Directive concerning the
management report. The linguistic regime for “regulated information”, which includes
the management report as part of the annual financial report, is laid down by each
Member State in accordance with Article 20 of the Transparency Directive.
DIGITALISATION (FORMAT AND DIGITAL TAGGING)
36) What are the digital format requirements for the management report that
includes a sustainability statement?
Article 29d of the Accounting Directive requires undertakings that have to carry out
sustainability reporting to prepare their management report (at consolidated level,
where applicable) in the electronic reporting format specified in Article 3 of the ESEF
Delegated Regulation (i.e. XHTML) and to mark-up their sustainability statement
within the management report in accordance with the digital taxonomy to be specified
by way of an amendment to the ESEF Delegated Regulation.
37) Do undertakings also have to mark-up Article 8 Taxonomy Regulation
disclosures?
Yes. Article 29d of the Accounting Directive requires undertakings that have to publish
a sustainability statement in their management report to mark-up their sustainability
statement, including the disclosures provided for in Article 8 of the Taxonomy
Regulation, in accordance with the digital taxonomy to be specified by way of an
amendment to the ESEF Delegated Regulation.
38) What are the format requirements that undertakings need to comply with pending
the adoption by the European Commission of a digital taxonomy for the mark-up
of the sustainability statement?
Article 29d of the Accounting Directive requires undertakings that have to publish a
sustainability statement in their management report to prepare their management report
in the electronic reporting format specified in Article 3 of the ESEF Delegated
Regulation (i.e. in XHTML) and to mark-up the sustainability statement within the
management report in accordance with the specific digital taxonomy that will be
adopted by way of an amendment to the ESEF Delegated Regulation. Until the
adoption of this digital taxonomy, undertakings are not required to mark-up their
sustainability statements. Considering that the sustainability statement will become
machine-readable only once it is both included in an XHTML document and marked-up
with a digital taxonomy, pending the adoption of the digital taxonomy undertakings are
also not required to prepare the management report in XHTML.
PUBLICATION
3339) What is the deadline for the publication of the management report that includes
the sustainability statement?
Article 30 of the Accounting Directive sets out the rules for the publication of the
management report (which includes the sustainability statement prepared under Articles
19a/29a of the Accounting Directive, where relevant), which must be published
together with the assurance opinion/report and within at the latest 12 months of the
balance sheet date of the financial year for which the report is drawn up, as provided for
by each Member State.
Undertakings that are issuers of securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated
market are also required to publish their annual financial report (which includes the
management report, therefore the sustainability statement) at the latest four months
after the end of each financial year, based on Article 4(5) of the Transparency
Directive, which cross-refers to Articles 19a and 29a of the Accounting Directive.
SUPERVISION
40) Which authorities are in charge of supervising compliance with the requirements
for the sustainability statement prepared in accordance with Articles 19a and 29a
of the Accounting Directive?
The CSRD does not introduce any changes to the pre-existing EU supervisory regime,
which requires Member States to have in place penalties that are effective,
proportionate and dissuasive for the cases of non-compliance by limited liability
undertakings (Article 51 of the Accounting Directive), and to establish a national
supervisory authority with powers to supervise compliance by issuers of transferable
securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market (Articles 28 and subsequent of
the Transparency Directive). This means that undertakings’ compliance with
sustainability reporting requirements will be subject to the national sanctioning regime
in place for the management report of limited liability undertakings (subject to the
Accounting Directive) and of issuers of transferable securities admitted to trading on an
EU regulated market (subject to the Transparency Directive). As regards issuers of
transferable securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market, ESMA is also
required to issue guidelines on the supervision of sustainability reporting by national
competent authorities pursuant to Article 28d Transparency Directive.
In any case, the sustainability statement to be included in the management report must
always be subject to assurance by a statutory auditor, or by an Independent Assurance
Services Provider (IASP) where allowed by a Member State, under Article 34 of the
Accounting Directive.
Section IV – FAQs on sustainability information reported under Article 40a of the
Accounting Directive
SCOPE AND APPLICATION DATE
3441) Does the ultimate third-country parent undertaking have to have a certain legal
form in order to fall under the scope of Article 40a of the Accounting Directive?
No. The legal form of the ultimate third-country parent undertaking is irrelevant for the
purposes of Article 40a of the Accounting Directive.
42) What are the obligations for the EU subsidiary or the EU branch under Article
40a of the Accounting Directive? Is the EU subsidiary/branch required to prepare
the sustainability report or just to publish and make accessible the sustainability
report prepared by its parent undertaking?
If a third-country undertaking falls within the scope of Article 40a of the Accounting
Directive, then either its EU subsidiary or EU branch will have to publish and make
accessible a sustainability report on behalf of its third-country parent undertaking. The
obligation to prepare the sustainability report does not explicitly fall on the EU
subsidiary or branch. This means that the third-country parent may prepare the report,
which will then be published and made accessible by the EU subsidiary or branch,
either by filing it in an EU business register or by publishing it on its website.
Alternatively, the EU subsidiary or branch may prepare, publish and make accessible
the report on behalf of its third-country parent undertaking.
43) Does each EU subsidiary or EU branch have to publish a sustainability report
under Article 40a of the Accounting Directive? Or is it sufficient that only one of
the EU subsidiaries or branches publishes the report and the other ones simply
provide a link to that sustainability report?
Article 40a of the Accounting Directive requires that at least one sustainability report
be disclosed by one subsidiary or branch in each Member State (“A Member State shall
require that a subsidiary undertaking established in its territory […]). To avoid double
reporting by the subsidiaries and branches of the same third-country undertaking,
Member States may allow for one subsidiary or branch established or located in its
territory to comply with the obligation in Article 40a of the Accounting Directive by
providing a link to the sustainability report published by another Union subsidiary or
branch of the third-country undertaking.
ESRS
44) Which ESRS should be used for the preparation of the sustainability report under
Article 40a of the Accounting Directive?
The sustainability report referred to in Article 40a of the Accounting Directive must be
prepared in accordance with the sustainability reporting standards to be adopted under
Article 40b of the Accounting Directive.
By way of derogation, Article 40a(2) second subparagraph of the Accounting Directive
allows the sustainability report to be prepared in accordance with the sustainability
reporting standards adopted under Article 29b of the Accounting Directive (i.e. ESRS)
or in a manner equivalent to the sustainability reporting standards adopted under Article
29b of the Accounting Directive, as determined by a Commission decision on
equivalence. This provision should be read in the sense that a third-country parent
undertaking falling under the scope of Article 40a of the Accounting Directive may
35choose to publish a consolidated sustainability statement under Article 29a of the
Accounting Directive (prepared in accordance with the standards adopted under Article
29b), instead of having its EU subsidiary or EU branch publish a sustainability report at
the group level under Article 40a of the Accounting Directive. In that case, the
exemptions for the EU subsidiary set out in Articles 19a(9) and 29a(8) of the
Accounting Directive would apply.
45) What happens if the EU subsidiary/branch does not manage to collect all the
necessary information for the preparation of the sustainability report?
In the event that not all the required information is provided, the subsidiary undertaking
or branch shall draw up, publish and make accessible the sustainability report,
containing all information in its possession, obtained or acquired, and issue a statement
indicating that the third-country undertaking did not make the necessary information
available (Art. 40a(2) fourth subparagraph of the Accounting Directive).
ARTICLE 8 TAXONOMY REGULATION DISCLOSURES
46) Do undertakings have to include Art. 8 Taxonomy Disclosures in the sustainability
report prepared under Article 40a of the Accounting Directive?
No. Undertakings reporting in accordance with Article 40a of the Accounting Directive
do not have to include Article 8 Taxonomy Regulation disclosures in the sustainability
report.
47) If a third-country parent undertaking subject to Article 40a of the Accounting
Directive chooses to prepare and publish a consolidated sustainability statement
prepared in accordance with ESRS instead of a sustainability report, is that third-
country parent undertaking required to report Article 8 Taxonomy Regulation
disclosures?
A third-country parent undertaking subject to Article 40a of the Accounting Directive
that chooses to publish a consolidated sustainability statement prepared in accordance
with ESRS instead of a sustainability report is not required to report under Article 8
Taxonomy Regulation.
However, in order for the Union subsidiaries of that third-country parent to be
exempted from their sustainability reporting requirements under Articles 19a/29a of the
Accounting Directive (where these Union subsidiaries are subject to sustainability
reporting requirements under Articles 19a/29a Accounting Directive), Article 8
Taxonomy Regulation disclosures covering the activities carried out by those Union
subsidiaries must be included in their own management report or in the consolidated
sustainability reporting carried out by the third-country parent undertaking100.
EXEMPTION RULES
100 Article 19a(9) second subparagraph, point (c), and Article 29a(8) second subparagraph, point (c) of the
Accounting Directive.
3648) Can the Union subsidiaries subject to Article 40a of the Accounting Directive
benefit from the exemption regime under Article 19a(9) and 29(8) of the
Accounting Directive?
The sustainability statement prepared in accordance with Articles 19a/29a of the
Accounting Directive and the sustainability report prepared in accordance with Article
40a of the Accounting Directive have a different content and operate under separate
regimes.
Therefore, a Union subsidiary publishing a sustainability report at the group level of its
third-country parent company according to the provisions of Article 40a does not
exempt the Union subsidiary itself nor its own subsidiaries from complying with the
reporting obligations of Articles 19a and/or 29a.
However, a third-country parent undertaking falling under the scope of Article 40a may
choose to publish a consolidated sustainability statement under Article 29a (prepared in
accordance with the sustainability reporting standards adopted under Article 29b or in a
manner equivalent to those sustainability reporting standards), instead of having its EU
subsidiary or EU branch publish a sustainability report at the group level under Article
40a. In this case, the EU subsidiary is exempted from publishing the sustainability
report under Article 40a, provided that the conditions set out in Articles 19a(9) and
29a(8) are met.
LANGUAGE AND FORMAT
49) In which language should the sustainability report be published?
The linguistic regime for the sustainability report is laid down by each Member State in
accordance with Article 21 of the Company Law Directive.
50) What are the format requirements for the sustainability report to be provided
under Article 40a of the Accounting Directive?
The Accounting Directive does not require a specific format for the publication of the
sustainability report. However, Article 33a – introduced by Directive (EU) 2023/2864
for the functioning of the European Single Access Point (ESAP Omnibus Directive)101
– requires subsidiaries and branches subject to Article 40a to submit to the collection
body designated by the Member State the sustainability report in a data extractable
format together with the relevant accompanying metadata102. The Commission is also
empowered to adopt implementing measures to specify further metadata to accompany
the sustainability report and to require a machine-readable format.
PUBLICATION
51) When should the undertakings/branches publish the sustainability report?
101 Directive (EU) 2023/2864 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2023 amending
certain Directives as regards the establishment and functioning of the European single access point (OJ L,
2023/2864).
102 Article 33a Accounting Directive as amended by the ESAP package.
37Article 40d(1) of the Accounting Directive requires subsidiary undertakings and
branches referred to in Article 40a(1) of the Accounting Directive to publish the
sustainability report – together with the assurance opinion and, where applicable, the
statement mentioned in the fourth subparagraph of Article 40a(2) of the Accounting
Directive – within 12 months of the balance sheet date of the financial year for which
the report is drawn up.
SUPERVISION
52) Which authorities are in charge of supervising compliance with the requirements
for the sustainability report?
The CSRD does not introduce any changes to the pre-existing sanctioning regime under
the Accounting Directive, which requires Member States to have in place penalties that
are effective, proportionate, and dissuasive for the cases of non-compliance by
undertakings subject to Accounting Directive requirements103. Undertakings’
compliance with sustainability reporting requirements is therefore subject to the
national sanctioning regime in place for the management report of the undertakings
subject to the Accounting Directive. In any case, the sustainability report must be
always subject to assurance by an assurance provider under Article 40a(3) of the
Accounting Directive104.
Section V – FAQs on the assurance of sustainability reporting
APPROVAL OF STATUTORY AUDITORS AND AUDIT FIRMS
53) Shall the natural persons who carry out the statutory audits on behalf of the audit
firm satisfy the conditions imposed by Articles 4 and 6 to 12 of the Audit Directive,
including the additional specific requirements of Articles 7(2), Article 8(3), the
second subparagraph of Article 10(1) and the fourth subparagraph of Article
14(2) of the Audit Directive? Shall the natural persons holding voting rights in an
audit firm satisfy also the conditions imposed by Articles 4 and 6 to 12 of the Audit
Directive, including the additional specific requirements of Articles 7(2), Article
8(3), the second subparagraph of Article 10(1) and the fourth subparagraph of
Article 14(2) of the Audit Directive, even if the audit firm does not plan to provide
assurance of sustainability reporting? What about the requirements for the
natural persons who compose the administrative or management body of the audit
firm?
103 Article 51 Accounting Directive: “Member States shall provide for penalties applicable to infringements of
the national provisions adopted in accordance with this Directive and shall take all the measures necessary to
ensure that those penalties are enforced. The penalties provided for shall be effective, proportionate and
dissuasive”.
104 Article 40a(3) first subparagraph: “Member States shall require that the sustainability report […] is
published accompanied by an assurance opinion expressed by one or more person(s) or firm(s) authorised to
give an opinion on the assurance of sustainability reporting under the national law of the third-country
undertaking or of a Member State.”
38Article 3 of the Audit Directive - regulating the approval of statutory auditors and audit
firms - provides that competent authorities may approve statutory auditors and audit
firms only if certain conditions are met.
The conditions referred to in Article 3(3) of the Audit Directive for the approval of
statutory auditors cross-refer to Articles 4 and 6 to 10 of the Audit Directive, while the
conditions referred to in Article 3(4) of the Audit Directive for the approval of audit
firms cross-refer to Articles 4 and 6 to 12 of the Audit Directive.
The wording of Article 4 of the Audit Directive covering good repute is broad enough
to also apply to the assurance of sustainability reporting, while Articles 6 to 12 of the
Audit Directive have been amended in order to explicitly apply to the assurance of
sustainability reporting.
Where a statutory auditor or audit firm wishes to be approved to provide assurance on
sustainability reporting it will have to comply with all the relevant requirements in
national law transposing the Audit Directive as regards the assurance of sustainability
reporting, including those referred to in Article 3(4) of the Audit Directive. Compliance
with requirements for the assurance of sustainability reporting is not mandatory for the
approval under Article 3 of the Audit Directive of a statutory auditor or audit firm that
does not provide assurance on sustainability reporting.
54) What are the approval requirements for sustainability assurance for statutory
auditors approved before 1 January 2024 or that on 1 January 2024 were
undergoing the approval process?
For statutory auditors to be able to provide assurance of sustainability reporting they
need to be approved and then comply with the additional requirements for
sustainability.
More specifically, based on Article 14a third subparagraph of the Audit Directive, the
statutory auditors approved before 1 January 2026 – that were either approved before 1
January 2024 or that on 1 January 2024 were undergoing the approval process – that
want to carry out also sustainability assurance, do not have to comply with Articles
7(2), 8(3), 10(1) 2nd subparagraph, and 14(2) 4th subparagraph of the Accounting
Directive but still need to acquire the necessary knowledge through continuing
education.
55) Can statutory auditors approved before 1 January 2026 apply indefinitely to be
approved for sustainability assurance? Which requirements would apply for their
approval?
Under Article 14a third subparagraph of the Audit Directive, statutory auditors
approved before 1 January 2026 who wish to carry out the assurance of sustainability
reporting must acquire the necessary knowledge of sustainability reporting and the
assurance of sustainability reporting, including of the subjects listed in Article 8(3) of
the Audit Directive, via the continuing education referred to in Article 13 of the Audit
Directive. Article 14a of the Audit Directive does not require additional examinations
nor the acquisition of this knowledge to be done prior to obtaining the approval. The
Audit Directive does not set out time limits for statutory auditors approved before 1
January 2026 to apply for carrying out sustainability assurance in compliance with
these requirements.
3956) In order for the statutory auditor or the trainee to also be approved to carry out
the assurance of sustainability reporting, will the three-year practical training
required under Article 10(1) first subparagraph of the Audit Directive need to
include eight months of practical training in the field of sustainability assurance or
will it have to be extended by another eight months?
For the statutory auditor or the trainee to also be approved to carry out the assurance of
sustainability reporting, the three-year practical training required under Article 10(1)
first subparagraph of the Audit Directive will need to include eight months of practical
training on the assurance of annual and consolidated sustainability reporting or on other
sustainability-related services.
The statutory auditor or trainee that has already completed the three-year practical
training at the moment of applying for the approval to carry out assurance of
sustainability reporting will have to perform an additional period of eight months of
practical training on the assurance of annual and consolidated sustainability reporting or
on other sustainability-related services.
Article 14a, first and second subparagraphs of the Audit Directive exempts from this
requirement the following categories of professionals: statutory auditors that are
approved or recognised to carry out statutory audits before 1 January 2024 and persons
that on 1 January 2024 are undergoing the approval process provided they complete
that process by 1 January 2026. Pursuant to Article 14a third subparagraph of the Audit
Directive, these professionals will still need to acquire the necessary knowledge
through continuing education.
57) Under Article 10(1) second subparagraph of the Audit Directive, in order for the
statutory auditor or the trainee to also be approved to carry out the assurance of
sustainability reporting, at least eight months of the practical training referred to
in the first subparagraph shall be on the assurance of annual and consolidated
sustainability reporting or on other sustainability-related services. What is the
correct interpretation of “other sustainability-related services”?
“Other sustainability-related services” should be understood as services related to
sustainability reporting other than assurance. They could encompass, for example,
consulting services on sustainability reports and the preparation of sustainability
reports.
58) Can a statutory auditor approved to carry out statutory audits before 1 January
2024 in Member State A be approved to carry out the assurance of sustainability
reporting in Member State B, even though that statutory auditor is not approved
to carry out the assurance of sustainability reporting in Member State A? For the
registration in Member State B, does this auditor need to be registered as
statutory auditor and as assurance service provider or can this auditor only be
registered as assurance service provider?
For the registration in Member State B, the statutory auditor needs to be approved as a
statutory auditor in that Member State (see Articles 3(1) and 14(1) of the Audit
Directive). If that is the case and the auditor wishes to be registered as an assurance
services provider, the transitional regime under Article 14a of the Audit Directive will
apply in Member State B (see also FAQ 54). Approval as an assurance services
provider in Member State A is not required.
4059) A statutory auditor approved to carry out statutory audits after 1 January 2024 in
Member State A, and who is also approved to carry out the assurance of
sustainability reporting in that Member State, wants to be registered in Member
State B. In this case does the statutory auditor need to be registered in Member
State B as auditor and as assurance service provider or could this statutory
auditor be registered only as assurance service provider?
The statutory auditor should be registered as a statutory auditor and as assurance
services provider in Member State B. The only entities that can be registered as
assurance services providers without being auditors are the Independent Assurance
Services Providers (IASPs).
ACCREDITATION AND APPROVAL OF INDEPENDENT ASSURANCE
SERVICES PROVIDERS (IASPS)
60) Can natural persons be accredited as Independent Assurance Services Providers
(IASPs)?
Yes. Article 2 point (23) of the Audit Directive and Article 2 point (20) of the
Accounting Directive define IASPs as “a conformity assessment body accredited in
accordance with Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the
Council for the specific conformity assessment activity referred to in point (aa) of the
second subparagraph of Article 34(1) of Directive 2013/34/EU”. Regulation No
765/2008 also defines the conformity assessment body as “a body that performs
conformity assessment activities including calibration, testing, certification and
inspection”.
While Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 only refers to the accreditation of bodies, it is to
be recalled that IASPs are not within the intended scope of that Regulation. The term
“body” should be read as to include the case of natural persons to ensure a level playing
field between IASPs and statutory auditors.
61) IASPs established in a Member State can carry out the assurance of sustainability
reporting in that territory, provided that they are subject to requirements
equivalent to those set out in the Audit Directive. Does the equivalence of the
requirements need to cover also Article 3a of the Audit Directive?
Article 34(4) of the Accounting Directive requires IASPs to comply with requirements
equivalent to the ones in the Audit Directive for them to be able to carry out
sustainability assurance. These requirements include the non-exhaustive list set out in
Article 34(4) of the Accounting Directive and an equivalence assessment with the
assurance of sustainability reporting as defined in Article 2, point (22) of the Audit
Directive.
To ensure the level playing field between IASPs and statutory auditors, IASPs should
also comply with registration requirements equivalent to those set out in Article 3a of
the Audit Directive.
ACCREDITED INDEPENDENT THIRD PARTY
4162) What is the "accredited independent third party" referred to in Articles 34(6) of
the Accounting Directive and 37(3) of the Audit Directive?
Recital (63) CSRD reads “Member States should ensure that when an undertaking is
required by Union law to have elements of its sustainability reporting verified by an
accredited independent third party, the report of the accredited independent third party
should be made available either as an annex to the management report or by any other
publicly accessible means. Such making available of that report should not pre-empt
the outcome of the assurance opinion of which the third-party verification should
remain independent. It should not entail any duplication of work between the auditor or
the independent assurance services provider that expresses the assurance opinion and
the accredited independent third party.”
An “accredited independent third party” is an entity, usually an expert other than the
statutory auditor or Independent Assurance Services Provider (IASP), providing the
assurance opinion on the sustainability statement, that might verify parts of the
sustainability reporting, such as GHG emissions. The CSRD requires transparency as
regards the results of its work and non-duplication with the work of the statutory
auditors/IASPs105.
INDEPENDENT ASSURANCE SERVICES PROVIDERS (IASPS)
63) Will an Independent Assurance Services Provider (IASP) established in the
territory of another Member State be able to perform tasks in a Member State
that does not allow IASPs to carry out assurance on sustainability reporting in its
territory?
No. An IASP established in the territory of another Member State will not be able to
provide assurance on sustainability reporting in a Member State that does not allow
IASPs to carry out assurance on sustainability reporting in its territory.
Article 34(4) first subparagraph of the Accounting Directive provides Member States
with the option to allow IASPs established in their territory to express the assurance
opinion on sustainability reporting, provided that these IASPs are subject to
requirements equivalent to those set out by the Audit Directive for statutory auditors
that carry out the assurance of sustainability reporting. Article 34(5) first subparagraph
of the Accounting Directive requires only Member States that have made use of this
option to allow IASPs established in another Member State to carry out the assurance
of sustainability reporting in their territory.
64) If the IASP is established in a different Member State, who will have supervisory
powers for the work performed by the IASP?
Where the IASP carries out the assurance of sustainability reporting in the territory of
another Member State (host Member State), the Member State where the IASP is
established (home Member State) should be responsible for supervising the work of the
IASP unless the host Member State decides to supervise the assurance of sustainability
reporting carried out by IASPs in its territory106. If the host Member State decides to
supervise the assurance of sustainability reporting carried out in its territory by IASPs
105 Article 34(6) of the Accounting Directive and 37(3) second subparagraph of the Audit Directive.
106 Article 34(5) of the Accounting Directive.
42registered in another Member State, the host Member State shall: (i) not impose more
stringent requirements or liability on such IASPs than those required for assurance of
sustainability reporting by the national laws for the IASPs or auditors established in that
host Member State; and (ii) inform other Member States about its decision to supervise
the assurance of sustainability reporting carried out by IASPs established in other
Member States.
65) Once a Member State has allowed IASPs to be established on its territory, are
national undertakings automatically allowed to resort to IASPs to carry out the
assurance on sustainability reporting?
Yes, undertakings will be allowed to resort to IASPs for the assurance of their
sustainability statement once a Member State has allowed IASPs to carry out the
assurance on sustainability reporting.
THIRD-COUNTRY ASSURANCE PROVIDERS
66) Can third-country Independent Assurance Services Providers (IASPs) provide
sustainability assurance in the Union?
Based on Article 34(4) of the Accounting Directive, the IASPs established in the
territory of a Member State may be allowed to provide the assurance of sustainability
reporting.
The definition of IASP under Article 2 point (23) of the Audit Directive and Article 2
point (20) of the Accounting Directive requires its accreditation pursuant to Regulation
765/2008. While that Regulation only refers to the accreditation of bodies that are
established in the territory of a Member State, it is to be recalled that IASPs are not
within the intended scope of that Regulation. IASPs are carrying out assurance services
for sustainability reporting. Hence, the scheme for authorisation of IASPs has to be
interpreted in the light of the GATS (General Agreement on Trade in Services of the
World Trade Organisation) commitments of the Member States and of the Union’s
bilateral agreements. Consequently, in the context of IASPs, Regulation 765/2008 has
to be interpreted in such a way that third-country IASPs are allowed to provide the
assurance of sustainability reporting in accordance with Member States’s commitments.
CONFIDENTIALITY
67) Are confidentiality requirements in Article 23 of the Audit Directive also
applicable to professionals performing the assurance of sustainability reporting?
Yes. Confidentiality requirements in Article 23 of the Audit Directive are also
applicable to professionals performing the assurance of sustainability reporting. Where
the Member State has allowed an IASP or a statutory auditor other than the one
auditing the financial statements to perform the assurance of sustainability reporting,
these assurance providers should be able to exchange information to appropriately
coordinate.
43ASSURANCE SERVICES
68) What is the meaning of the term “sustainability analysis” used in Article 8(3)
point (b) of the Audit Directive?
The term “sustainability analysis” was used as a parallel to “financial analysis” from
the Audit Directive for statutory auditors. While “financial analysis” refers to an
assessment of the viability, stability, and profitability of a business, sub-business or
project, “sustainability analysis” should be considered as an assessment of the
sustainability matters affecting a business and sustainability matters on which the
business may have an impact.
FEES
69) Would it be considered a breach of Article 25 of the Audit Directive if the fees for
the assurance of sustainability reporting are lowered in the case the same
statutory auditor also performs the statutory audit?
Article 25 of the Audit Directive requires Member States to ensure that fees for
statutory audits and the assurance of sustainability reporting are not influenced or
determined by the provision of “additional services” provided to the audited entity,
which should be intended as “services other than the statutory audit and assurance of
sustainability reporting”. It does not regulate the relationship between the fees for
statutory audits and assurance of sustainability reporting.
ASSURANCE OF THE SUSTAINABILITY STATEMENT PREPARED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLES 19a AND 29a ACCOUNTING DIRECTIVE
70) What should the assurance provider express an opinion on, according to Article
34(1) of the Accounting Directive?
Under Article 34(1) second subparagraph, point (aa) of the Accounting Directive, any
undertaking subject to sustainability reporting under Articles 19a and 29a of the
Accounting Directive must obtain an assurance opinion on their sustainability
statement.
This assurance opinion is based on a limited assurance engagement as regards the
compliance of the sustainability statement with the following requirements:
− the sustainability reporting requirements provided for in the Accounting Directive
(including the compliance of the sustainability reporting with the ESRS adopted
pursuant to Articles 29b/29c of the Accounting Directive, the process carried out
by the undertaking to identify the information reported pursuant to those ESRS -
i.e., the double materiality assessment process, and the compliance with the
requirement to mark-up sustainability reporting in accordance with Article 29d of
the Accounting Directive); and
− the reporting requirements provided for in Article 8 of the Taxonomy Regulation.
The assurance providers are expected to perform procedures that enable them to
conclude that no matter has come to their attention to cause them to believe that the
information included in the sustainability statement is not fairly presented, in all
material respects, in accordance with ESRS as adopted by the Union and that it is not
44compliant with the legal requirements to mark-up sustainability information (i.e., the
digital tagging) and with the legal requirements of Article 8 of the Taxonomy
Regulation.
The first part of the conclusion referring to the fair presentation, in all material respects,
in accordance with the ESRS entails an opinion on:
− whether the undertaking’s sustainability statement, including the process to
identify the information reported (i.e., the double materiality assessment
process), are compliant with ESRS; and
− whether the outcome of this process has resulted in the disclosure of all material
sustainability-related impacts, risks and opportunities of the undertaking in
accordance with ESRS.
71) Paragraph 121 ESRS 1 (General requirements) allows the undertaking to
incorporate information in its sustainability statement by reference to its report
prepared according to EU Eco-Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS)
Regulation (EU) No 1221/2009. This provision is subject to the conditions of
paragraph 120, including that the information incorporated by reference is
subject to at least the same level of assurance as the sustainability statement. Is the
undertaking’s report prepared according to EU Eco-Management and Audit
Scheme (EMAS) Regulation (EU) No 1221/2009 subject to at least the same level of
assurance as the sustainability statement?
Under Article 34(1) second subparagraph, point (aa) of the Accounting Directive, any
undertaking subject to sustainability reporting under Articles 19a and 29a of the
Accounting Directive must obtain an assurance opinion based on a limited assurance
engagement. The undertaking’s report prepared according to EU Eco-Management and
Audit Scheme (EMAS) Regulation (EU) No 1221/2009 is subject to a validation
performed by an environmental verifier and this validation can be considered to be at
least at the same level of assurance as the CSRD limited assurance requirement.
72) In the case of two different statutory auditors carrying out the audit of the
financial statements and the assurance of the sustainability statement, which one
of the two should express the opinion on whether the management report is
consistent with the financial statements?
Based on Article 34(1), second subparagraph, point (a)(i) of the Accounting Directive,
the statutory auditor or audit firm carrying out the statutory audit of financial statements
has to express an opinion on whether the management report is consistent with the
financial statements for the same financial year. When a statutory auditor or an audit
firm other than the one(s) carrying out the statutory audit of financial statements is in
charge of expressing the assurance opinion on sustainability reporting, the statutory
auditor or audit firm in charge of auditing the financial statements remains in charge of
expressing an opinion on the consistency between management report and financial
statements for the same financial year.
73) In which document does the assurance opinion need to be included?
45In the assurance report107. If the assurance opinion is given by the same auditor that
does the audit of financial statements, Member States may allow auditors to include the
assurance opinion as a separate section of the audit report.
74) How should the assurance report be published? Are there any format
requirements for the assurance report?
Union law does not currently require a specific format for the audit report and/or its
signature. However, Article 33a of the Accounting Directive as amended by the ESAP
package, requires undertakings to submit the assurance report to the relevant ESAP
collection body when they make it public and to use a data extractable format (or a
machine-readable format, where required by Union or national law), together with the
relevant accompanying metadata. The Commission is also empowered to adopt
implementing measures to specify further metadata to accompany the assurance report
and to require a machine-readable format.
75) What assurance standards should be used by assurance providers of the
sustainability statement pending the adoption of assurance standards by the
European Commission?
Based on Article 26(1) second subparagraph of the Audit Directive, Member States
may apply national auditing standards, procedures or requirements as long as the
Commission has not adopted an international auditing standard covering the same
subject matter.
Given the qualitative characteristics of information required under ESRS 1 (Chapter 2
and Appendix B: relevance and faithful representation as well as comparability,
verifiability and understandability) and in order to avoid fragmentation and ensure that
practices are as consistent as possible during this transitional period, pending the
adoption of Union assurance standards, the Commission has requested the Committee
of European Auditing Oversight Bodies (CEAOB) to develop in 2024 non-binding
guidelines for statutory auditors and other assurance services providers.
76) Would it be possible for Member States to allow undertakings subject to CSRD
requirements to assign, on a voluntary basis, an engagement to express an opinion
based on a mixed form of assurance (i.e. a limited assurance on parts of the
sustainability reporting and a reasonable assurance on other parts of the
reporting – for example on specific key performance indicators)?
Based on Article 34(1), second subparagraph, point (aa) of the Accounting Directive,
the assurance opinion on the sustainability reporting has to be based on a limited
assurance engagement108. Considering that a reasonable assurance engagement provides
for a higher level of assurance compared to a limited assurance engagement, the CSRD
does not prevent an undertaking from deciding voluntarily to ask for an opinion based
on reasonable assurance on the whole sustainability reporting or parts of it. This
decision would be for the undertaking and not for the assurance provider.
107 Article 28a Audit Directive.
108 Based on Article 26a Audit Directive, the Commission is empowered to adopt sustainability assurance
standards for limited assurance by 1 October 2026. The Commission is also empowered to adopt sustainability
assurance standards for reasonable assurance by 1 October 2028, following an assessment to determine if
reasonable assurance is feasible for auditors and for undertakings.
4677) Shall undertakings that report sustainability information in accordance with
ESRS on a voluntary basis (such as SMEs without securities admitted to trading
on an EU regulated market) be required to subject this information to assurance?
The CSRD does not regulate sustainability reporting carried out on a voluntary basis.
An undertaking carrying out sustainability reporting on a voluntary basis is therefore
not required to subject its sustainability information to an assurance engagement.
NON-ASSURANCE SERVICES
78) What are the non-audit service restrictions when a statutory auditor provides
CSRD assurance services to an entity or group that is not a financial statement
audit client?
Under Article 25c(1) of the Audit Directive, a statutory auditor or an audit firm
carrying out the assurance of sustainability reporting of a Public Interest Entity (PIE) -
or a member of the network - shall not provide to the PIE the prohibited non-audit
services referred to in Article 5(1) second subparagraph, points (b), (c), (e) to (k) of the
Audit Regulation.
Under Article 25c(2) of the Audit Directive, that statutory auditor or audit firm may
provide to the PIE non-audit services other than:
− the prohibited non-audit services referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article; or
− if applicable (i.e. where the statutory auditor also carries out audits of financial
statements), the prohibited non-audit services referred to in Article 5(1) second
subparagraph of the Audit Regulation; or
− services considered by Member States to represent a threat to independence as
referred to in Article 5(2) of that Regulation, subject to the approval of the audit
committee after it has properly assessed threats to independence and the
safeguards applied in accordance with Article 22b of the Audit Directive.
Therefore:
− when the audit firm carries out only the assurance of sustainability reporting of a
PIE, it may provide non-audit services other than the prohibited ones referred to
in Article 5(1) second subparagraph point (b), (c) and (e) to (k) of the Audit
Regulation (since the latter pose a risk to the independence of the audit firm in
case of carrying out the assurance of sustainability reporting);
− when the audit firm carries both the statutory audit and the assurance of
sustainability reporting of a given PIE, it may provide non-audit services other
than the prohibited ones referred to in Article 5(1) second subparagraph of the
Audit Regulation (i.e. the prohibited services referred to in all points (a) to (k)
because these services pose the risk to the independence of the audit firm in case
of both: the assurance of sustainability reporting – points (b), (c) and (e) to (k)
and the statutory audit – points (a) to (k)).
ASSURANCE OF THE SUSTAINABILITY REPORT PREPARED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 40a OF THE ACCOUNTING DIRECTIVE
4779) What happens if the third-country undertaking does not provide the assurance
opinion to the EU subsidiary/EU branch?
Pursuant to Article 40a(3) of the Accounting Directive, if the third-country undertaking
does not provide the assurance opinion, the subsidiary undertaking or branch shall issue
a statement indicating that fact.
80) How should the assurance opinion for the sustainability report prepared pursuant
to Article 40a of the Accounting Directive be published? Are there any format
requirements?
Based on Article 40d(1) of the Accounting Directive, the assurance opinion for the
sustainability report prepared pursuant to Article 40a shall be published together with
the sustainability report – and, where applicable, the statement mentioned in the fourth
subparagraph of Article 40a(2) of the Accounting Directive – within 12 months of the
balance sheet date of the financial year for which the report is drawn up, as provided for
by each Member State, in accordance with Articles 14 to 28 of the Company Law
Directive and, where relevant, in accordance with Article 36 of that Directive. Union
law does not currently require specific format requirements for the assurance opinion.
However, Article 33a of the Accounting Directive - introduced by the ESAP package
109 - requires subsidiaries and branches subject to Article 40a of the Accounting
Directive to submit the sustainability report to the collection body designated by the
Member State in a data extractable format together with the relevant accompanying
metadata. The Commission is also empowered to adopt implementing measures to
specify further metadata to accompany the assurance opinion and to require a machine-
readable format.
Section VI – FAQs on key intangible resources
81) According to Article 19(1) fourth subparagraph of the Accounting Directive,
undertakings shall report information on the key intangible resources and explain
how the business model of the undertaking fundamentally depends on such
resources and how such resources are a source of value creation for the
undertaking. Does this disclosure requirement apply to all kinds of key intangible
resources, including intangible assets recognised on the balance sheet?
Article 19(1) fourth subparagraph of the Accounting Directive is not limited to
information about key intangible resources that are not recognised as intangible assets
on the balance sheet. Consequently, the requirement applies to all key intangible
resources of the undertaking, including intangible assets recognised on the balance
sheet.
This holistic approach allows users to understand the dependencies of the undertaking’s
business model on key intangible resources and their relevance for the company’s value
creation, irrespective of whether they would meet the recognition and measurement
criteria of the applicable accounting framework. It will help users to assess the
undertaking’s market value.
109 In particular by Directive (EU) 2023/2864 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December
2023 amending certain Directives as regards the establishment and functioning of the European single access
point (OJ L, 2023/2864) “ESAP Omnibus Directive”.
4882) Which entities are required to provide information on key intangible resources in
the management report? Shall this requirement also apply to credit institutions
and insurance undertaking, irrespective of their legal form?
Large undertakings and listed SMEs (except micro-undertakings) shall report
information on the key intangible resources and explain how the business model of the
undertaking fundamentally depends on such resources and how such resources are a
source of value creation for the undertaking. Article 19 of the Accounting Directive
only applies to the types of undertakings referred to in Article 1(1) of the Accounting
Directive, including credit institutions and insurance undertakings that fulfil the
conditions in Article 1(1) of the Accounting Directive. This information must be
included in the management report (but not necessarily in the sustainability statement).
83) Do key intangible resources have to be included in the sustainability statement?
Article 19(1) of the Accounting Directive sets out information which must be included
in the undertaking’s management report. Article 19(1) fourth subparagraph of the
Accounting Directive requires information concerning key intangible resources to be
included in the management report. Therefore, this information does not necessarily
have to be included in the sustainability statement and may be provided in a different
section of the management report.
Section VII – Additional FAQs on requirements for third-country undertakings
84) Are third-country undertakings required to report sustainability information at
individual and/or consolidated level (individual/consolidated sustainability
statement) under Articles 19a/29a of the Accounting Directive?
Without prejudice to Article 23 of the Transparency Directive, third-country
undertakings are required to report sustainability information at individual and/or
consolidated level under Articles 19a/29a of the Accounting Directive, but only if the
third-country undertaking is an issuer of transferable securities admitted to trading on
an EU regulated market, excluding micro-undertakings.
Third-country issuers must include sustainability information within their management
report as part of their annual financial report, based on Article 4(5) of the Transparency
Directive, which cross-refers to Articles 19a and 29a of the Accounting Directive.
85) Can third-country SMEs with transferable securities admitted to trading on an
EU regulated market opt out from the obligation to report sustainability
information for financial years starting before 1 January 2028 pursuant to Article
19a(7) of the Accounting Directive?
Yes, the opt-out provision set out in Article 19a(7) of the Accounting Directive also
applies to third-country SMEs with transferable securities admitted to trading on an EU
regulated market (see FAQ 16).
4986) If a third-country parent undertaking publishes on a voluntary basis a
consolidated sustainability statement to allow its subsidiaries to avail of the
exemptions under Articles 19a(9) and 29a(8) of the Accounting Directive, does that
consolidated sustainability statement need to be included in a consolidated
management report or can it be a standalone document?
The third-country parent undertaking that complies with Article 29a of the Accounting
Directive on a voluntary basis may include the consolidated sustainability statement in
a separate document.
87) Does the consolidated sustainability statement of the third-country parent
undertaking prepared pursuant to Article 29a of the Accounting Directive have to
include all its subsidiaries or only the EU subsidiaries?
The rules for the consolidation of the sustainability statement are the same ones as for
the consolidation of the financial statements. Based on Article 22(6) of the Accounting
Directive110, the consolidated sustainability statement must include all its subsidiary
undertakings, regardless of where the registered offices of such subsidiary undertakings
are situated.
88) Pending a Commission decision on the equivalence of third-country sustainability
standards, how can a third-country undertaking that is not required to report
sustainability information under Union law allow its Union subsidiaries to be
exempted from sustainability reporting under Articles 19a and 29a of the
Accounting Directive?
A third-country undertaking that is not required to report sustainability information
under Union law and that wants to allow its Union subsidiaries to be exempted from
sustainability reporting under Articles 19a and 29a of the Accounting Directive may
publish a consolidated sustainability statement prepared in accordance with ESRS.
Alternatively, based on Article 48i(1) of the Accounting Directive, until financial years
ending on 6 January 2030, Member States must allow a subsidiary governed by the law
of a Member State that is subject to Articles 19a and 29a of the Accounting Directive
and whose parent undertaking is governed by the law of a third-country to prepare and
publish a consolidated sustainability statement under Article 29a of the Accounting
Directive, that includes all Union direct or indirect subsidiary undertakings of such
third-country parent undertaking that are subject to Articles 19a and 29a of the
Accounting Directive. Article 48i(2) of the Accounting Directive specifies that the
Union subsidiary undertaking preparing the consolidated sustainability reporting shall
be one of the Union subsidiary undertakings of the group that generated the greatest
turnover in the Union in at least one of the preceding five financial years, on a
consolidated basis where applicable.
Based on Article 48i(3) of the Accounting Directive, the preparation and publication of
the consolidated sustainability statement prepared and published by the Union
subsidiary referred to in Article 48i(1) of the Accounting Directive leads to the
exemption from sustainability reporting of all undertakings included in the
consolidation, provided that the conditions in Articles 19a(9) and 29a(8) are met.
110 Article 22(6) Accounting Directive: “Without prejudice to Article 23(9), a parent undertaking and all of its
subsidiary undertakings shall be undertakings to be consolidated regardless of where the registered offices of
such subsidiary undertakings are situated.”
5089) Do third-country issuers have to include Article 8 Taxonomy Regulation
disclosures in their sustainability statement?
Without prejudice to Article 23 of the Transparency Directive, third-country issuers
reporting in accordance with Article 19a or 29a of the Accounting Directive must
include Article 8 Taxonomy disclosures in their sustainability statements.
Article 4(5) of the Transparency Directive requires EU and third-country issuers of
transferable securities admitted to trading on an EU regulated market (excluding micro-
undertakings) to draw up their management report in accordance with Articles 19, 19a,
20, and 29d(1) of the Accounting Directive (or Articles 29, 29a and 29d(2) of the
Accounting Directive in the case of a consolidated management report) and to include
the specifications adopted pursuant to Article 8(4) Taxonomy Regulation, “when drawn
up by undertakings referred to in those provisions”.
In line with the co-legislators’ clear intention to extend the sustainability reporting
requirements set out in the Accounting Directive (which only applies to EU
undertakings) to EU and third-country issuers, “when drawn up by undertakings
referred to in those provisions” is to be interpreted as referring to the categories of
undertakings referred to in Articles 19a and 29a of the Accounting Directive (i.e. large
undertakings, listed SMEs excluding micro-undertakings, and parent companies of
large groups). Since the Transparency Directive applies to all EU and third-country
issuers (including micro-undertakings), this sentence is needed to ensure that listed
micro-undertakings are not subject to sustainability reporting requirements.
Article 8 of the Taxonomy Regulation requires companies subject to Articles 19a or
29a of the Accounting Directive to publish how and to what extent the company’s
activities are associated with economic activities that qualify as environmentally
sustainable. The wording of Article 4(5) of the Transparency Directive indicates that
where an EU or third-country issuer is subject to sustainability reporting requirements
under Articles 19a or 29a of the Accounting Directive, it must include Article 8
Taxonomy Regulation disclosures in its management report.
Section VIII – FAQ on SFDR
90) May financial market participants assume that any indicator reported as non-
material by an investee undertaking subject to the CSRD does not contribute to
the corresponding indicator of principal adverse impacts in the context of the
SFDR disclosures?
Yes. Financial market participants may assume that any indicator reported as non-
material by an investee company applying ESRS does not contribute to the
corresponding indicator of principal adverse impacts in the context of the SFDR
disclosures, i.e. the value of that investment does not need to be included in the
numerator of the given SFDR principal adverse impact indicator.
Article 29b(5) point (b) of the Accounting Directive requires the Commission, to the
greatest extent possible, to take account of the information that financial market
participants need to comply with their disclosure obligations laid down in Regulation
(EU) 2019/2088 and the delegated acts adopted pursuant to that Regulation when
adopting sustainability reporting standards.
As a consequence of the obligation set out in the CSRD to take into account the
information needs of financial market participants, any indicator reported as non-
51material by an investee undertaking subject to the CSRD requirements is relevant
information and may be considered as not contributing to principal adverse impacts
under the SFDR.
Financial market participants will find this information in CSRD reporting as ESRS 1
paragraph 35 requires that when an undertaking considers that a specific datapoint
derived from the SFDR is not material, the undertaking explicitly states that the
information in question is “not material”111.
In addition, ESRS 2, paragraph 56 requires undertakings subject to the CSRD to
include a table of all the datapoints that derive from other EU legislation, including the
SFDR, indicating where they can be found in the sustainability statement and indicating
“Not material” in the table for those that the undertaking has assessed as not material,
in accordance with ESRS 1 paragraph 35.
111 The same approach is taken for datapoints that derive from other EU legislation listed in Appendix B of
ESRS 2.
52Disclaimer
This Compilation of Explanations by EFRAG provides non-authoritative guidance and
accompanies the European Sustainability Reporting Standards (ESRS), as stipulated in Article
19a and 29a of Directive 2013/34/EU (the Accounting Directive). This means that if anything in
this document appears to contradict any requirement or explanation in ESRS, ESRS take
precedence. This Compilation of Explanations is issued following EFRAG’s due process for such
non-authoritative documents and under the sole responsibility of EFRAG.
EFRAG assumes no responsibility or liability whatsoever for the content or any consequences
or damages directly, indirectly or incidentally arising from following the advice or guidance
contained in this document. Users of this document are advised to exercise their own judgment
in applying ESRS. Information contained in this document should not be substituted for the
services of an appropriately qualified professional.
This Compilation of Explanations has been developed for use by large listed and unlisted
companies that are subject to ESRS. It is therefore not intended for use by non-listed small- and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), which may use the upcoming voluntary standard for SMEs.
This Compilation of Explanations relates to the sector-agnostic ESRS as adopted by the
European Commission on 31 July 2023. Sector-specific standards may add sector specifications.
The content of each Explanation has been drafted to provide an answer to a specific technical
question and cannot be directly extended by analogy to a different fact pattern.
About EFRAG
EFRAG’s mission is to serve the European public interest in both financial and sustainability
reporting by developing and promoting European views in the field of corporate reporting.
EFRAG builds on and contributes to progress in corporate reporting. In its sustainability
reporting activities, EFRAG provides technical advice to the European Commission in the form
of draft European Sustainability Reporting Standards (ESRS) elaborated under a robust due
process and supports the effective implementation of ESRS. EFRAG seeks input from all
stakeholders and obtains evidence about specific European circumstances throughout the
standard-setting process. Its legitimacy is built on excellence, transparency, governance, due
process, public accountability and thought leadership. This enables EFRAG to speak
convincingly, clearly, and consistently and be recognised as the European voice in corporate
reporting and a contributor to global progress in corporate reporting.
EFRAG is funded by the European Union through the Single Market Programme in which the
EEA-EFTA countries (Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein) as well as Kosovo participate. Any views
and opinions expressed are, however, those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect
those of the European Union, the European Commission or of countries that participate in the
Single Market Programme. Neither the European Union, the European Commission nor
countries participating in the Single market Programme can be held responsible for them.
© 2024 EFRAG All rights reserved. Reproduction and use rights are strictly limited. For further
details please contact efragsecretariat@efrag.orgESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations December 2024
Table of Contents
Introduction .............................................................................................................. 4
Environment .............................................................................................................. 5
ESRS E1 Climate change ..................................................................................................... 5
ESRS E1-4 Targets related to climate change mitigation and adaptation......................................... 5
ESRS E4 Biodiversity and ecosystems .................................................................................. 7
ESRS E4 Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 – Material impacts, risks and
opportunities and their interaction with strategy and business model .......................................... 7
ESRS E4-5 – Impact metrics related to biodiversity and ecosystems change ................................... 8
TTTThhhheeee QQQQuuuueeeessssttttiiiioooonnnnssss iiiinnnn tttthhhhiiiissss ddddooooccccuuuummmmeeeennnntttt aaaarrrreeee iiiiddddeeeennnnttttiiiiffffiiiieeeedddd bbbbyyyy tttthhhheeee pppprrrrooooggggrrrreeeessssssssiiiivvvveeee nnnnuuuummmmbbbbeeeerrrr ((((IIIIDDDD)))) tttthhhhaaaatttt tttthhhheeeeyyyy rrrreeeecccceeeeiiiivvvveeee
aaaatttt tttthhhheeee bbbbeeeeggggiiiinnnnnnnniiiinnnngggg ooooffff tttthhhheeee ssssuuuubbbbmmmmiiiissssssssiiiioooonnnn ttttoooo tttthhhheeee QQQQ&&&&AAAA PPPPllllaaaattttffffoooorrrrmmmm.... TTTThhhheeee ssssyyyysssstttteeeemmmm aaaattttttttrrrriiiibbbbuuuutttteeeessss iiiiddddeeeennnnttttiiiiffffiiiiccccaaaattttiiiioooonnnn
nnnnuuuummmmbbbbeeeerrrrssss aaaallllssssoooo ttttoooo ppppaaaarrrrttttiiiiaaaallll ssssuuuubbbbmmmmiiiissssssssiiiioooonnnnssss.... FFFFoooorrrr tttthhhhiiiissss rrrreeeeaaaassssoooonnnn,,,, tttthhhheeee IIIIDDDD nnnnuuuummmmbbbbeeeerrrr iiiissss nnnnooootttt iiiinnnnddddiiiiccccaaaattttiiiivvvveeee ooooffff hhhhoooowwww
mmmmaaaannnnyyyy qqqquuuueeeessssttttiiiioooonnnnssss EEEEFFFFRRRRAAAAGGGG hhhhaaaassss ffffiiiinnnnaaaallllllllyyyy rrrreeeecccceeeeiiiivvvveeeedddd....
Compilation of Explanations December 2024 Page 3 of 10ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations December 2024
Introduction
EFRAG has started the collection of questions related to ESRS through the EFRAG ESRS Q&A
Platform on 24 October 2023. EFRAG releases explanations following due process on a regular
basis. Explanations are non-authoritative in nature and answer technical questions on ESRS by
showing where in the standards the content is provided and how to navigate it accordingly.
Since October 2023, EFRAG has released the following batches of explanations (number of
explanations):
February 2024 12
March 2024 12
May 2024 44
July 2024 25
November 2024 64
December 2024 5
Total 162
Explanations released from February to November have been combined and been published in
the Compilation of Explanations – January–November 2024. The December 2024 batch contains
explanations for five additional questions, some of which are expected to be particularly relevant
to certain sectors. They will later be added to the next major update to the Compilation of
Explanations expected to be released in Spring 2025. The questions are identified by a progressive
identification number (ID), which they received when submitted to the Q&A Platform.
Compilation of Explanations December 2024 Page 4 of 10ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations December 2024
Environment
ESRS E1 Climate change
ESRS E1-4 Targets related to climate change mitigation and adaptation
Questions ID 1033, 1076 and 1122 – Value chain phase-in for climate-
related targets and credit institutions
Release date
December 2024
Questions asked
ID 1033: In the context of ESRS E1 paragraph 34 (a) and in a situation where a credit institution
has set GHG emissions intensity targets, are credit institutions expected to provide
associated absolute values in relation to their emissions intensity targets even if such
metric is not used to steer the portfolio and due to the fact that it can be neither
predictive or of confirmatory value due to the business model of the credit institutions?
ID 1076: Would it be possible for a financial institution to disclose GHG emissions targets set on
Scope 3 category 15 (i.e. ‘financed emissions’) without reporting the corresponding
targets in absolute emissions?’
ID 1122: Regarding absolute values for financial institutions – why not show exposure and
exposure percentages instead of GHG emissions?’
Key Terms
GHG removal; GHG emission reduction; value chain phase-in; credit institutions
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 34 and AR 23; ESRS 1 paragraphs 132 and 133
Background
Questions ID 1033, 1076 and 1112 as listed above were merged and answered simultaneously in
this Explanation.
ESRS E1 paragraph 34 (a) states: ‘If the undertaking has set GHG emission reduction targets, ESRS
2 MDR-T and the following requirements shall apply:
(a) GHG emission reduction targets shall be disclosed in absolute value (either in tonnes
of CO2eq or as a percentage of the emissions of a base year) and, where relevant, in
intensity value …’.
Compilation of Explanations December 2024 Page 5 of 10ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations December 2024
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 23 states: ‘Under paragraph 34 (a), the undertaking may disclose GHG
emission reduction targets in intensity value. Intensity targets are formulated as ratios of GHG
emissions relative to a unit of physical activity or economic output. Relevant units of activity or
output are referred to in ESRS sector-specific standards. In cases where the undertaking has only
set a GHG intensity reduction target, it shall nevertheless disclose the associated absolute values
for the target year and interim target year(s). This may result in a situation where an undertaking
is required to disclose an increase of absolute GHG emissions for the target year and interim
target year(s), for example because it anticipates organic growth of its business.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 132 states: ‘For the first 3 years of the undertaking’s sustainability reporting
under the ESRS, in the event that not all the necessary information regarding its upstream and
downstream value chain is available, the undertaking shall explain the efforts made to obtain the
necessary information about its upstream and downstream value chain, the reasons why not all
of the necessary information could be obtained, and its plans to obtain the necessary information
in the future.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 133 of Chapter 10.2 Transitional provision related to Chapter 5 Value chain
states: ‘For the first 3 years of its sustainability reporting under the ESRS, in order to take account
of the difficulties that undertakings may encounter in gathering information from actors
throughout their value chain and in order to limit the burden for SMEs in the value chain:
(a) when disclosing information on policies, actions and targets in accordance with
ESRS 2 and other ESRS, the undertaking may limit upstream and downstream value
chain information to information available in-house, such as data already available to
the undertaking and publicly available information; and
(b) when disclosing metrics the undertaking is not required to include upstream and
downstream value chain information except for datapoints derived from other EU
legislation as listed in ESRS 2 Appendix B.’
Answer
Scope 3, category 15 (Investments) targets for the lending portfolio are considered value chain
information (see also IG 2 Value Chain, FAQ 2).
When reporting on GHG emission reduction targets, an undertaking may refer to ESRS 1 paragraph
133 (a) of Chapter 10.2 Transitional provision related to Chapter 5 Value chain, which allows an
undertaking to adopt transitional measures for value chain information in the first three annual
sustainability statements.
This provision is applicable when the undertaking has adopted intensity targets for its Scope 3,
category 15 (Investments) emissions, but the corresponding associated absolute values for the
target year and interim target years (ESRS E1-1 paragraph AR 23) are not available (see ESRS 1
paragraph 132).
When only targets in intensity value are available, in the first three years of reporting, a financial
institution may limit the information on value chain targets to the information available in-house,
which might include data already collected for Pillar 3 reporting.
EFRAG may work on specific sector provisions in the future to cover this issue.
Compilation of Explanations December 2024 Page 6 of 10ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations December 2024
ESRS E4 Biodiversity and ecosystems
ESRS E4 Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 SBM-3 – Material
impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and
business model
Question ID 1116 – Disclosure requirements related to ESRS E4 Disclosure
Requirement SBM-3 if biodiversity is material for the upstream value
chain only
Release date
December 2024
Question asked
Is the ESRS 1 Disclosure Requirement SBM-3 metric to be reported for ESRS E4 if biodiversity was
assessed as not material for the company’s own operations but material only for the upstream
value chain? The SBM-3 metric specifically refers to the company’s own sites, i.e. own operations.
Additionally, no sites were found located in or near biodiversity-sensitive areas that have negative
impacts on these areas.
ESRS Reference
ESRS E4 paragraph 16 (Disclosure Requirement SBM-3 Material impacts, risks and opportunities
and their interaction with strategy and business model)
Key terms
Value Chain
Background
ESRS E4 paragraph 16: states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose:
(a) a list of material sites in its own operations, including sites under its operational control,
based on the results of paragraph 17 (a). The undertaking shall disclose these locations
by:
i. specifying the activities negatively affecting biodiversity-sensitive areas;
ii. providing a breakdown of sites according to the impacts and dependencies identified,
and to the ecological status of the areas (with reference to the specific ecosystem
baseline level) where they are located; and
iii. specifying the biodiversity-sensitive areas impacted, for users to be able to determine
the location and the responsible competent authority with regard to the activities
specified in paragraph 16 (a) (i);
Compilation of Explanations December 2024 Page 7 of 10ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations December 2024
(b) whether it has identified material negative impacts with regard to land degradation,
desertification or soil sealing; and
(c) whether it has operations that affect threatened species.’
Answer
If the topic ‘biodiversity and ecosystems’ has been identified as material for the undertaking’s
upstream (or downstream) value chain only, the undertaking:
(a) would not disclose the information required by ESRS E4 paragraph 16 (a), which refers to
own operations only;
(b) would be required to disclose information required by ESRS E4 paragraph 16 (b) in
connection with its upstream (or downstream) value chain, as ESRS E4 paragraph 16 (b)
applies not only to impacts connected to the undertaking’s sites in its own operations;
and
(c) In relation to ESRS E4 paragraph 16 (c), the undertaking would be required to disclose
whether it has operations that affect threatened species (this refers to own operations
and not to operations in the upstream or downstream value chain). If ESRS E4 is material
and does not have own operations that affect threatened species, it shall state so.
Finally, where appropriate, following ESRS 1 paragraph 11 the undertaking shall include
information, including metrics (see IG 2 Value chain paragraph 79) related to its upstream and
downstream value chain, on an entity-specific basis.
ESRS E4-5 – Impact metrics related to biodiversity and ecosystems change
Question ID 1058 – ESRS E4 metrics covering own operations or
upstream/downstream value chain
Release date
December 2024
Question asked
ESRS E4-5 paragraph 37 mentions that ‘For datapoints specified in paragraphs 38 to 41, the
undertaking shall consider its own operations’. Does that mean that ESRS E4 paragraph 33 where
it says ‘The undertaking shall report metrics related to its material impacts on biodiversity and
ecosystems’ also refers to the undertaking’s own operations only?
ESRS Reference
ESRS E4 paragraphs 33–41 (ESRS E4 Disclosure Requirement E4-5 – Impact metrics related to
biodiversity and ecosystem change); ESRS 1 paragraphs 11, 30 and AR 3
Compilation of Explanations December 2024 Page 8 of 10ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations December 2024
Key terms
Metrics, own operations, materiality
Background
ESRS E4 paragraph 33 states: ‘The undertaking shall report metrics related to its material impacts
on biodiversity and ecosystems.’
ESRS E4 paragraph 35 states: ‘If the undertaking identified sites located in or near biodiversity-
sensitive areas that it is negatively affecting (see paragraph 19(a)), the undertaking shall disclose
the number and area (in hectares) of sites owned, leased or managed in or near these protected
areas or key biodiversity areas.’
ESRS E4 paragraph 36 states: ‘If the undertaking has identified material impacts with regards to
land-use change, or impacts on the extent and condition of ecosystems , it may also disclose their
land-use based on a Life Cycle Assessment.’
ESRS E4 paragraph 37 states: ‘For datapoints specified in paragraphs 38 to 41, the undertaking
shall consider its own operations.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 11 states: ‘In addition to the disclosure requirements laid down in the three
categories of ESRS, when an undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not
covered or not covered with sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific
facts and circumstances, it shall provide additional entity-specific disclosures to enable users to
understand the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities. Application
requirements AR 1 to AR 5 provide further guidance regarding entity-specific disclosures.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 133 states: ‘For the first 3 years of its sustainability reporting under the ESRS, in
order to take account of the difficulties that undertakings may encounter in gathering information
from actors throughout their value chain and in order to limit the burden for SMEs in the value
chain ...
(b) when disclosing metrics, the undertaking is not required to include upstream and
downstream value chain information, except for datapoints derived from other EU
legislation, as listed in ESRS 2 Appendix B.’
ESRS 1 paragraph AR 3 states: ‘When determining the usefulness of metrics for inclusion in its
entity-specific disclosures, the undertaking shall consider whether:
(a) its chosen performance metrics provide insight into:
i. how effective its practices are in reducing negative outcomes and/or increasing
positive outcomes for people and the environment (for impacts); and/or
ii. the likelihood that its practices result in financial effects on the undertaking (for risks
and opportunities );
(b) the measured outcomes are sufficiently reliable, meaning that they do not involve an
excessive number of assumptions and unknowns that would render the metrics too
arbitrary to provide a faithful representation; and
(c) it has provided sufficient contextual information to interpret performance metrics
appropriately, and whether variations in such contextual information may impact the
comparability of the metrics over time.’
Compilation of Explanations December 2024 Page 9 of 10ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations December 2024
Answer
IG 2 Value chain specifies in its ‘VC coverage map of ESRS Set 1’ on page 44 that E4-5 ‘only reflects
own operations, as no coverage of the value chain is required.’ For clarity, it is to be noted that:
(a) ESRS E4 paragraph 37 specifies, in relation to the Disclosure Requirements in paragraphs
38 to 41, that undertakings are to consider only own operations;
(b) ESRS E4 paragraph 35 specifies metrics focusing on sites owned, leased or managed by
the undertaking; and
(c) ESRS E4 paragraph 36 is a voluntary disclosure on land use based on a life cycle
assessment, which inherently considers the undertaking’s value chain, as it involves
assessing the impact of products or services on land use across all stages, from raw
material sourcing to production and disposal.
In addition, if the undertaking identified material impacts, risks or opportunities in the value
chain, it shall determine whether and what additional entity-specific disclosures it needs to
disclose in line with ESRS 1 paragraphs 11 and 30 (b). See in particular ESRS 1 paragraph AR 3 on
how to determine the usefulness of metrics for inclusion in entity-specific disclosures. It is to be
noted that transitional provisions apply to the disclosure of value chain information (see ESRS 1
paragraph 133 (b)).
Compilation of Explanations December 2024 Page 10 of 10Disclaimer
This Compilation of Explanations by EFRAG provides non-authoritative and accompanies the
European Sustainability Reporting Standards (ESRS), as stipulated in Article 19a and 29a of
Directive 2013/34/EU (the Accounting Directive). This means that if anything in this document
appears to contradict any requirement or explanation in ESRS, ESRS take precedence. This
Compilation of Explanations is issued following EFRAG’s due process for such non-authoritative
documents and under the sole responsibility of EFRAG.
EFRAG assumes no responsibility or liability whatsoever for the content or any consequences
or damages directly, indirectly or incidentally arising from following the advice or guidance
contained in this document. Users of this document are advised to exercise their own judgment
in applying ESRS. Information contained in this document should not be substituted for the
services of an appropriately qualified professional.
This Compilation of Explanations has been developed for use by large listed and unlisted
companies that are subject to ESRS. It is therefore not intended for use by non-listed small- and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), which may use the upcoming Voluntary SME standard.
This Compilation of Explanations relates to the sector agnostic ESRS as adopted by the
European Commission on 31 July 2023. Sector-specific standards may add sector specifications.
The content of each Explanation has been drafted to provide an answer to a specific technical
question and cannot be directly extended by analogy to a different fact pattern.
About EFRAG
EFRAG’s mission is to serve the European public interest in both financial and sustainability
reporting by developing and promoting European views in the field of corporate reporting.
EFRAG builds on and contributes to progress in corporate reporting. In its sustainability
reporting activities, EFRAG provides technical advice to the European Commission in the form
of draft European Sustainability Reporting Standards (ESRS) elaborated under a robust due
process and supports the effective implementation of ESRS. EFRAG seeks input from all
stakeholders and obtains evidence about specific European circumstances throughout the
standard-setting process. Its legitimacy is built on excellence, transparency, governance, due
process, public accountability and thought leadership. This enables EFRAG to speak
convincingly, clearly, and consistently, and be recognised as the European voice in corporate
reporting and a contributor to global progress in corporate reporting.
EFRAG is funded by the European Union through the Single Market Programme in which the
EEA-EFTA countries (Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein), as well as Kosovo participate. Any
views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily
reflect those of the European Union, the European Commission or of countries that participate
in the Single Market Programme. Neither the European Union, the European Commission nor
countries participating in the Single market Programme can be held responsible for them.
© 2024 EFRAG All rights reserved. Reproduction and use rights are strictly limited. For further
details please contact efragsecretariat@efrag.orgESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Note: Refer to ‘Appendix I: Table of ID release date’ to identify the most recently issued
Compilation of Explanations.
Table of contents
Introduction ............................................................................................................... 9
Questions related to ESRS General requirements and general disclosures .................. 11
ESRS 1 General requirements ........................................................................................... 11
ESRS 1 chapter 1 Categories of ESRS standards, reporting areas, and drafting conventions ........... 11
Question ID 29 and ID 261 – ‘May’ and ‘shall’ reporting requirements ...................................... 11
Question ID 106 - Entity-specific guidance and examples ........................................................... 13
Question ID 109 - Bold text and ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6 ...................................... 15
Question ID 157 - ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement GOV, and specification in the topical ESRS ... 19
Question ID 429 – Entity-specific and ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirements...................................... 21
Question ID 442 – Entity-specific metrics .................................................................................... 24
ESRS 1 chapter 2 Qualitative characteristics of information ........................................................... 25
Question ID 337 – Metrics calculation – same level of precision ................................................ 25
Question ID 863 – Metrics calculation – Annual average ............................................................ 27
ESRS 1 chapter 3 Double materiality as the basis for sustainability disclosures .............................. 28
Reference to Implementation Guidance 1 Materiality Assessment ............................................ 28
Question ID 37 - Positive impact only .......................................................................................... 28
Question ID 162 - Minimum number of material matters ........................................................... 29
Question ID 172 – Materiality assessment – private equity structures ....................................... 30
Question ID 185 – Objective evidence and stakeholders’ opinion .............................................. 32
Question ID 438 – Treatment of non-material datapoints, e.g. radioactive waste – can it be a
non-material datapoint? .............................................................................................................. 34
Question ID 461 - Sustainability statement – ESRS 1 flowchart E and disclosure of transition
plans ............................................................................................................................................ 35
Question ID 526 and ID 1021 – Disclosure of a non-material datapoint (water-consumption in
own operations) related to a (a) material and (b) non-material topic ......................................... 37
Question ID 753– Financial materiality in the value chain and power purchase agreements ..... 40
Question ID 821 – Risk and opportunity for financial materiality ............................................... 42
Question ID 952 – Metrics – rounding and decimals; materiality of information ....................... 44
Question ID 1019 – Sustainability matter expected to become material in the future ............... 45
Question ID 1039 – Time horizon – only long-term material ...................................................... 47
Question ID 1048 – Disclosure of datapoint(s) related to a non-material Disclosure Requirement
for a metric .................................................................................................................................. 48
Question ID 1297 – Level of disaggregation ................................................................................ 50
ESRS 1 chapter 5 Value chain ......................................................................................................... 52
Reference to Implementation Guidance EFRAG IG 2 Value Chain ............................................... 52
Question ID 41 - Financial institutions – scope of reporting boundary ....................................... 52
Question ID 148 - Scope of consolidation for non-EU and unconsolidated subsidiaries ............. 53
Question ID 217 - Prudential consolidation ................................................................................. 54
ESRS 1 chapter 6 Time horizons ..................................................................................................... 56
Question ID 180 - Time horizon: impact versus financial materiality .......................................... 56
Question ID 286 - Financial year different from calendar year .................................................... 57
Question ID 1054 – Short-term time horizon .............................................................................. 59
ESRS 1 chapter 7 preparation and presentation of sustainability information ................................ 60
Question ID 552 – Comparative information ............................................................................... 60
ESRS 1 chapter 8 Structure of sustainability statement .................................................................. 61
Question ID 38 - Structure of the sustainability statement ......................................................... 61
Question ID 296 – Location of ESRS 2-related Disclosure Requirements in topical standards .... 62
Question ID 401 - Include quantitative information in qualitative information .......................... 64
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 3 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question ID 426 – Structure of the sustainability statement ...................................................... 65
Question ID 762 – Location of policies, actions and targets in the sustainability report ............. 66
Question ID 906 – Structure of sustainability statement – annex / appendix possible? ............. 68
ESRS 1 chapter 9 Linkages with other parts of corporate reporting and connected information .... 70
Question ID 243 - Reference to financial statements .................................................................. 70
Question ID 1047 – Conditions for incorporation by reference and content index ..................... 71
ESRS 1 chapter 10 Transitional provisions ...................................................................................... 73
Question ID 204 - Phase-in for first-time large undertakings ...................................................... 73
Question ID 291 - Phase-in 750 employees and topical standards .............................................. 74
Question ID 910 – Transitional provisions for value chain and Scope 3 GHG emissions ............. 76
Question ID 923 – Phase-in entity-specific disclosures................................................................ 77
Question ID 1090 – Length of transitional provisions for early adopters .................................... 78
Question ID 1144 – Phase-in 750 employees: Calculation of average number ........................... 79
ESRS 2 General disclosures ............................................................................................... 80
Questions related to all Disclosure Requirements .......................................................................... 80
Question ID 177 – Mapping sustainability matters as listed in ESRS 1 paragraph AR 16 with
Disclosure Requirements ............................................................................................................. 80
Question ID 733 – Overlap of ESRS 2 and topical standards ........................................................ 80
ESRS 2 BP-2 Disclosure in relation to specific circumstances .......................................................... 82
Question ID 58 - Transitional provisions 750 employees ............................................................. 82
Question ID 306 - Location of MDR (Disclosure Requirement BP-2) in the report during phase-in
750 employees ............................................................................................................................. 85
Question ID 504 – Disclosure Requirements on material metrics when information is not
available ....................................................................................................................................... 86
ESRS 2 GOV-1 The role of administrative, management and supervisory bodies ............................ 87
Question ID 171 and ID 358 – Administrative, management and supervisory bodies ................ 87
Question ID 728 – Representation of employees and other workers .......................................... 88
Question ID 781 – General meeting ............................................................................................ 89
Question ID 1072 – ESRS 2 GOV-1 – ESG expertise of governance bodies .................................. 90
EESRS 2 GOV-3 Integration of sustainability-related performance in incentive schemes ................ 92
Question ID 1013 – Potential discrepancy in variable remuneration between ESRS 2 and ESRS E1
..................................................................................................................................................... 92
ESRS 2 SBM-1 Strategy, business model and value chain ................................................................ 94
Question ID 39 – SBM-1 sector breakdown and phase-in ........................................................... 94
Question ID 293 - Relationship of strategy and policy ................................................................. 95
Question ID 395 – Revenue/net revenue .................................................................................... 96
Question ID 482 – Breakdown of total revenue – financial institutions ...................................... 97
Question ID 644 – Limits of fossil fuel sector ............................................................................... 99
Question ID 905 – Manufacture of chemicals/pesticides and other agrochemical products .... 101
ESRS 2 SBM 3 Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and
business model ............................................................................................................................ 102
Question ID 67 - ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement SBM-3 vocabulary/grammar used ............... 102
Question ID 935 – Financial effects – current versus anticipated .............................................. 103
ESRS 2 IRO-1 Description of the processes to identify and assess material impacts, risks and
opportunities ............................................................................................................................... 105
Question ID 517 – Disclosure of thresholds ............................................................................... 105
ESRS 2 IRO-2 Disclosure Requirements in ESRS covered by the undertaking’s sustainability
statement .................................................................................................................................... 107
Question ID 335 - Applicability of EU data points – Appendix B ................................................ 107
Question ID 628 – Content index ............................................................................................... 108
ESRS 2 Minimum Disclosure Requirement – Actions MDR-A – Actions and resources in relation to
material sustainability matters .................................................................................................... 109
Question ID 1056 – MDR-Actions and resources allocated ....................................................... 109
ESRS 2 Minimum Disclosure Requirement – Metrics MDR-M – Metrics in relation to material
sustainability matters .................................................................................................................. 111
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 4 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question ID 968 – Ecolabel ........................................................................................................ 111
ESRS 2 Minimum Disclosure Requirement – Targets MDR-T – Tracking effectiveness of policies and
actions through targets ................................................................................................................ 112
Question ID 1136 – Targets without policy ................................................................................ 112
Questions related to Environment ........................................................................... 114
ESRS E1 Climate change .................................................................................................. 114
ESRS E1 Disclosure requirement related to ESRS 2 GOV-3 Integration of sustainability related
performance in incentive schemes ............................................................................................... 114
Question ID 1013 – Potential discrepancy in variable remuneration between ESRS 2 and ESRS E1
................................................................................................................................................... 114
ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify
and assess material climate-related impacts, risks and opportunities .......................................... 114
Question ID 350 – Gross risk ...................................................................................................... 114
ESRS E1-4 Targets related to climate change mitigation and adaptation....................................... 115
Question ID 206 - Climate-related targets ................................................................................. 115
Question ID 531 – Base year ...................................................................................................... 117
Question ID 734 – Disclosure of progress in meeting climate-related targets .......................... 119
ESRS E1-5 Energy consumption and mix ....................................................................................... 120
Question ID 36 - Energy mix ...................................................................................................... 120
Question ID 338 – Activities in high-climate impact sectors...................................................... 121
Question ID 893 – Conversion factor fossil fuels ....................................................................... 123
Question ID 1126 – Heating values and geographical location of undertaking ......................... 124
ESRS E1-6 Gross scopes 1, 2, 3 and total GHG emissions ....................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
Question ID 81 - Subsidiaries and holding company – alignment for GHG protocol ................. 126
Question ID 43 - Scope 3 GHG emissions for insurance companies .......................................... 128
Question ID 167 - GHG protocol scope 3; sector ....................................................................... 129
Question ID 208 - GHG emission calculation ............................................................................. 130
Question ID 251 - Emission factors disclosure ........................................................................... 132
Question ID 268 – GHG emissions and annual update .............................................................. 132
Question ID 414 – Disaggregation of total emissions ................................................................ 134
Question ID 535 – Emission trading schemes ............................................................................ 137
Question ID 698 – Database for GHG emission factors ............................................................. 139
Question ID 718 – Disaggregation of GHG emissions ................................................................ 140
Question ID 831 – Contractual instruments .............................................................................. 142
Question ID 882 – Data availability for biogenic emissions in Scope 3 ...................................... 143
ESRS E1-7 GHG removals and GHG mitigation projects financed through carbon credits ............. 145
Question ID 432 – Net zero target and GHG removals .............................................................. 145
Question ID 536 – Carbon credit – Quality standards ............................................................... 147
Question ID 577 – GHG removals – Project definitions ............................................................. 148
Question ID 636 – Definition of types of removals .................................................................... 149
Question ID 873 – Transport of removed GHGs ........................................................................ 151
ESRS E1-9 Anticipated financial effects from material physical and transition risks and potential
climate-related opportunities ...................................................................................................... 152
Question ID 422 – Assets at risk and disclosure of monetary amount ...................................... 152
Question ID 555 – Financial effects and climate risk ................................................................. 154
ESRS E2 Pollution ........................................................................................................... 156
ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the processes to identify
and assess material pollution-related impacts, risks and opportunities ....................................... 156
Question ID 245 – Climate-risk analysis ..................................................................................... 156
Question ID 1060 – Pollution – affected communities’ consultations ....................................... 157
ESRS E2-1 Policies related to pollution ......................................................................................... 160
Question ID 186 – Substances of very high concern .................................................................. 160
ESRS E2-4 Pollution of air, water and soil ..................................................................................... 161
Question ID 201 – Oil spills – Chemical spills ............................................................................. 161
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 5 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question ID 440 - Pollutants emissions – disaggregation .......................................................... 163
Question ID 441 - Microplastics ................................................................................................. 165
Question ID 619 – Air emissions in ESRS E2 versus ESRS E1 ...................................................... 166
Question ID 653 – Microplastics – tires wear ............................................................................ 168
Question ID 713 and ID 928 – Microplastics – definition and REACH update ........................... 170
Question ID 832 – Pollutants emissions – changes over time ................................................... 172
ESRS E2-5 Substances of concern and substances of very high concern ........................................ 174
Question ID 226 and 301– Substances of (very high) concern and hazard classes .................... 174
Question ID 648 – Substances of (very high) concern – including entity-specific disclosures ... 178
Question ID 815 – Substances of concern – in articles .............................................................. 179
ESRS E2-6 Anticipated financial effects from pollution-related impacts, risks and opportunities . 181
Question ID 472 – Major incidents and deposits ....................................................................... 181
ESRS E3 Water and marine resources .............................................................................. 184
ESRS E3-1 – Policies related to water and marine resources ......................................................... 184
Question ID 456 – Policies on water treatment ......................................................................... 184
ESRS E3-4 – Water consumption .................................................................................................. 186
Question ID 455 – Contextual information and consolidated data for water consumption ...... 186
Question ID 526 and ID 1021 – Disclosure of a non-material datapoint (water-consumption in
own operations) related to a (a) material and (b) non-material topic ....................................... 189
Question ID 676 – Water metrics in the value chain ................................................................. 189
Question ID 776 – Pollutants emissions – granularity ............................................................... 191
ESRS E4 Biodiversity ....................................................................................................... 193
ESRS E4 Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 Description of processes to identify and
assess material biodiversity and ecosystem-related impacts, risks and opportunities ................. 193
Question ID 1025 – Direct drivers of biodiversity loss – definition ............................................ 193
ESRS E4-5 – Impact metrics related to biodiversity and ecosystems change ................................. 196
Question ID 802 – Reference lists of biodiversity-sensitive areas ............................................. 196
Question ID 953 – Mandatory disclosures of material metrics on biodiversity ......................... 197
Question ID 1115 – Disclosing the number and area of sites near or in biodiversity-sensitive
areas .......................................................................................................................................... 200
Question ID 1172 – Disclosure of the area of sites in or near biodiversity-sensitive area ......... 201
ESRS E5 Resource use and circular economy.................................................................... 204
ESRS E5-5 Resource outflows ....................................................................................................... 204
Question ID 283 – Whether waste incineration is a disposal operation .................................... 204
Question ID 400 – Recycled waste ............................................................................................. 205
Question ID 408 – Categorisation of waste streams .................................................................. 207
Question ID 438 – Treatment of non-material datapoints, e.g. radioactive waste – can it be a
non-material datapoint? ............................................................................................................ 208
Questions related to Social ..................................................................................... 208
ESRS S1 Own workforce ................................................................................................. 208
Question ID 434 – Difference between non-employees and value chain workers .................... 209
ESRS S1-4 Taking action on material impacts and approaches to mitigating material risks and
pursuing material opportunities related to own workforce, and effectiveness of those actions and
approaches .................................................................................................................................. 210
Question ID 214 - Resources to manage material impacts ........................................................ 210
ESRS S1-6 Characteristics of the undertaking’s employees ........................................................... 211
Question ID 31 - Breakdown of temporary, permanent, and non-guaranteed hours employees
................................................................................................................................................... 211
Question ID 32 – Methodology for presenting information on employees ............................... 212
Question ID 365 - Significant employment ................................................................................ 214
Question ID 430 – Definition of Gender .................................................................................... 215
ESRS S1-7 Characteristics of non-employee workers in the undertakings’ own workforce ........... 216
Question ID 33 - Definition of non-employees .......................................................................... 216
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 6 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS S1-8 Collective bargaining coverage and social dialogue ...................................................... 217
Question ID 215 - Social dialogue global percentage ................................................................ 217
Question ID 376 - Definition of collective bargaining ................................................................ 218
ESRS S1-10 Social protection ........................................................................................................ 219
Question ID 730 – Type of employee and social protection ...................................................... 219
ESRS S1-11 Social protection ........................................................................................................ 220
Question ID 339 – Use of secondary data and social protection ............................................... 220
Question ID 453 – Social protection and parental leave ............................................................ 221
ESRS S1-12 Persons with disabilities ............................................................................................ 222
Question ID 473 – Restrictions due to national regulations ...................................................... 222
ESRS S1-14 Health and safety metrics .......................................................................................... 223
Question ID 271 and ID 287– Difference between work-related accident and work-related injury
................................................................................................................................................... 223
Question ID 352 - Work-related ill health and fatalities from ill health ..................................... 225
Question ID 473 – Restrictions due to national regulations ...................................................... 226
ESRS S1-15 Work-life balance ....................................................................................................... 226
Question ID 340 – Entitlement to family-related leave ............................................................. 226
Question ID 341 - Conditions for paternity, maternity, parental leave ...................................... 227
ESRS S1-16 Remuneration metrics (pay gap and total remuneration)........................................... 229
Question ID 132 - Gender pay gap ............................................................................................. 229
Question ID 387 - Scope of ESRS S1-16 ...................................................................................... 230
Question ID 389 – Annual total remuneration ratio and types of workers ................................ 231
Question ID 549 – Gender pay gap; collective wage agreements ............................................. 232
Question ID 689 – Gender Pay Gap and gender ........................................................................ 233
Question ID 690 – Gender Pay Gap and Pay Transparency Directive ........................................ 234
ESRS S1-17 Incidents, complaints and severe human rights impacts ............................................ 235
Question ID 550 – Disclosure of discrimination/harassment cases found inconclusive ............ 235
ESRS S2 Policies related to value chain workers ............................................................... 236
Question ID 356 – Sub-contractors Scope S1, S2 ....................................................................... 236
ESRS S3 Affected communities ....................................................................................... 237
ESRS S4 Consumers and end-users .................................................................................. 237
Question ID 1026 – Definition of end users ............................................................................... 237
Questions related to Governance ............................................................................ 239
ESRS G1 Business conduct .............................................................................................. 239
Question ID 479 – Minimum disclosure requirements and ESRS G1 ......................................... 239
ESRS G1-4 Incidents of corruption or bribery ............................................................................... 240
Question ID 417 - Convictions ................................................................................................... 240
Question ID 800 – Corruption and Bribery ................................................................................ 241
ESRS G1-5 Political influence and lobbying activities .................................................................... 242
Question ID 510 – ESRS G1-5 Indirect political contributions and lobbying activities ............... 242
Question ID 560 – Beneficiary of political contributions ........................................................... 243
ESRS G1-6 Payment practices ....................................................................................................... 244
Question ID 419 – Legal proceedings currently outstanding for late payments ........................ 244
Question ID 444 - Payment practices ......................................................................................... 244
Questions related to XBRL and datapoints .............................................................. 246
Question ID 326 – Implementation of datapoints ..................................................................... 246
Appendix I: Table of ID release date ........................................................................ 248
Appendix II: Key word index .................................................................................... 254
Appendix III: Questions categorised as ‘already answered’ and reference to where they
have been answered .............................................................................................. 270
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 7 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
TTTThhhheeee QQQQuuuueeeessssttttiiiioooonnnnssss iiiinnnn tttthhhhiiiissss ddddooooccccuuuummmmeeeennnntttt aaaarrrreeee iiiiddddeeeennnnttttiiiiffffiiiieeeedddd bbbbyyyy tttthhhheeee pppprrrrooooggggrrrreeeessssssssiiiivvvveeee nnnnuuuummmmbbbbeeeerrrr ((((IIIIDDDD)))) tttthhhhaaaatttt tttthhhheeeeyyyy rrrreeeecccceeeeiiiivvvveeee
aaaatttt tttthhhheeee bbbbeeeeggggiiiinnnnnnnniiiinnnngggg ooooffff tttthhhheeee ssssuuuubbbbmmmmiiiissssssssiiiioooonnnn ttttoooo tttthhhheeee QQQQ&&&&AAAA PPPPllllaaaattttffffoooorrrrmmmm.... TTTThhhheeee ssssyyyysssstttteeeemmmm aaaattttttttrrrriiiibbbbuuuutttteeeessss iiiiddddeeeennnnttttiiiiffffiiiiccccaaaattttiiiioooonnnn
nnnnuuuummmmbbbbeeeerrrrssss aaaallllssssoooo ttttoooo ppppaaaarrrrttttiiiiaaaallll ssssuuuubbbbmmmmiiiissssssssiiiioooonnnnssss.... FFFFoooorrrr tttthhhhiiiissss rrrreeeeaaaassssoooonnnn,,,, tttthhhheeee IIIIDDDD nnnnuuuummmmbbbbeeeerrrr iiiissss nnnnooootttt iiiinnnnddddiiiiccccaaaattttiiiivvvveeee ooooffff hhhhoooowwww
mmmmaaaannnnyyyy qqqquuuueeeessssttttiiiioooonnnnssss EEEEFFFFRRRRAAAAGGGG hhhhaaaassss ffffiiiinnnnaaaallllllllyyyy rrrreeeecccceeeeiiiivvvveeeedddd....
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 8 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Introduction
EFRAG has started the collection of questions related to ESRS through the EFRAG ESRS Q&A
Platform on 24 October 2023. EFRAG releases explanations following due process on a regular
basis. Explanations are non-authoritative in nature, answer technical questions on ESRS by
showing where in the standards the content is provided and how to navigate them accordingly.
EFRAG has, since October 2023, released the following batches of explanations (number of
explanations):
February 2024 12
March 2024 12
May 2024 44
July 2024 25
November 2024 64
Total 157
The next major update of the Compilation of Explanations is expected to be released in Spring
2025. This document contains all 157 explanations on a consolidated basis. The questions are
identified by a progressive identification number (ID) that they received when submitted to the
Q&A Platform.
To inform when an explanation has been included in this document a release date is provided for
each explanation. Furthermore, Appendix I: Table of ID release date shows when an explanation
has been released.
Acknowledging that undertakings may need sufficient time to consider the content of an issued
Explanation, nevertheless they would be expected to consider them on a timely basis.
Explanations are grouped by topical area:
(a) ESRS General Requirements and General Disclosures;
(b) Environmental ESRS;
(c) Social ESRS;
(d) Governance ESRS; and
(e) XBRL and datapoints.
To order the explanations in a systematic manner and to increase usability for those looking for
an explanation, they were allocated to ESRS Disclosure Requirements respectively in the case of
ESRS 1 to its chapters.
A key word index in Appendix II supports the search of questions.
The Compilation of Explanations has in Appendix III a log of now 133 questions received that were
categorised as ‘already asked’ including a reference to where they have been already answered.
For convenience purposes hyperlinks have been added:
(a) to the official text of the respective ESRS including the corrigendum published on 18 April
2024 after each ESRS heading in this document (ESRS including Corrigendum);
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 9 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(b) to IG 1 Materiality Assessment at the beginning of ESRS 1 chapter 3 Double materiality as
the basis for sustainability disclosures section and IG 2: Value Chain at the beginning of
ESRS 1 chapter 5 Value chain section;
(c) to Question ID 177 - Mapping sustainability matters as listed in ESRS 1 paragraph AR 16
with Disclosure Requirements, which due to its importance and volume has been
published in a separate document; and
(d) within the explanations to cross-referenced to other explanations mentioned when
answering the question.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 10 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Questions related to ESRS General requirements and general disclosures
ESRS 1 General requirements
ESRS 1 General requirements
ESRS 1 chapter 1 Categories of ESRS standards, reporting areas, and
drafting conventions
Question ID 29 and ID 261 – ‘May’ and ‘shall’ reporting requirements
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
(1) What is the meaning of ‘may disclose’ in ESRS? How does that relate to ‘shall disclose’?
(2) Can you explain this based on ESRS Disclosure Requirement S1-12?
In addition, the following more specific questions have been received in ID 261 related to the
‘may’ and ‘shall’ reporting requirements:
(3) Does the materiality assessment take precedence over ESRS 1 paragraph 18?
(4) Is an undertaking required to disclose a datapoint that is not material if it is a ‘shall
disclose’ datapoint?
(5) Can an undertaking disregard the disclosure of a ‘may disclose’ datapoint if the
datapoint is material?
(6) What is the relevance of ESRS 1 paragraph 18 if materiality takes precedence over
ESRS 1 paragraph 18?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraphs 18, 77 and 80; ESRS 1 Chapters 1 to 3.5; ESRS 2 paragraph 62 and 72
Key terms
Voluntary disclosure requirements (‘may disclose’)
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 18 states: ‘ESRS uses the following terms to distinguish between different
degrees of obligation on the undertaking to disclose information:
(a) “shall disclose” – indicates that the provision is prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement
or datapoint; and
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 11 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(b) “may disclose” – indicates voluntary disclosure to encourage good practice.’
ESRS S1 paragraph 79 of Disclosure Requirement ESRS S1-12 is a ‘shall’ disclosure and states: ‘The
undertaking shall disclose the percentage of persons with disabilities amongst its employees
subject to legal restrictions on the collection of data.’
ESRS S1 paragraph 80 of Disclosure Requirement ESRS S1-12 is voluntary and states: ‘The
undertaking may disclose the percentage of employees with disabilities with a breakdown by
gender.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 11 states: ‘In addition to the disclosure requirements laid down in the three
categories of ESRS, when an undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not
covered or not covered with sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific
facts and circumstances, it shall provide additional entity-specific disclosures to enable users to
understand the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities.’
In ESRS E1 paragraph AR 32, instead of ‘may disclose’ the expression ‘can disclose’ is used as a
synonym; see, e.g. the statement ‘When preparing the information on energy consumption
required under paragraph 35 … The undertaking that consumes fuel as feedstocks can disclose
information on this consumption separately from the required disclosures’.
Answer
(1) What is the meaning of ‘may disclose’ in ESRS? How does that relate to ‘shall
disclose’?
(4) Is an undertaking required to disclose a datapoint that is not material if it is a ‘shall
disclose’ datapoint?
The drafting convention used in the ESRS is defined in ESRS 1 Chapter 1.3. The terms ‘shall
disclose’ and ‘may disclose’ are used to distinguish the degree of obligation on the undertaking
to disclose information; these are defined in ESRS 1 paragraph 18. The terms ‘shall disclose’ and
‘may disclose’ are to be applied in light of the materiality provisions of ESRS (refer to ESRS 1
Chapter 3.2 to 3.5).
(a) All the ‘shall’ datapoints in ESRS 2 General Disclosures are to be reported as they are
outside the materiality assessment. This includes the datapoints in topical standards that
relate to ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement IRO-1 Description of the process to identify and
assess material impacts, risks and opportunities (see ESRS 2 Appendix C: Disclosure and
Application Requirements in topical ESRS that are applicable jointly with ESRS 2 General
Disclosures).
(b) If a topic is not material for the undertaking, the ‘may’ and ‘shall’ datapoints in the
corresponding topical standard are not to be reported as the undertaking does not report
on non-material topics.
(c) If a topic is material for the undertaking, the ‘shall’ datapoints in the respective topical
standard that relate to ESRS 2 (refer to Appendix C of ESRS 2 for the complete list by
topical standard) must be reported.
(d) If a topic is material for the undertaking, the undertaking discloses the information
corresponding to the ‘shall’ datapoints in the topical standard in relation to policies,
actions and targets (PAT) as well as the information corresponding to the datapoints in
ESRS 2 MDR-P, MDR-A and MDR-T. If the undertaking cannot disclose the information on
PAT required under relevant topical ESRS because such PAT are not in place for the
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 12 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
specific material matter, it shall disclose this to be the case and provide reasons for not
having PAT. The undertaking may disclose a timeframe in which it aims to adopt them.
(e) If a topic is material for the undertaking, the undertaking discloses the information
corresponding to the ‘shall’ datapoints in the topical standard in relation to metrics if that
information is assessed to be material (refer to ESRS 1 paragraph 34), i.e. the undertaking
is not required to disclose a ‘shall disclose’ datapoint that is not material.
(f) If a topic (or a matter) is material for the undertaking, the undertaking decides whether
or not to include the ‘may’ disclosure datapoints related to that matter; however, it is
encouraged to disclose it as good practice, but it is not a requirement.
The criteria in paragraph 31 of ESRS 1 (significance of the information and users’ needs) are the
point of reference to be used when:
(a) defining the granularity of the content of the information provided under points (a), (c)
and (d) above; and
(b) assessing the materiality of the information under point (e) above.
(2) Can you explain this based on ESRS Disclosure Requirement S1-12?
Assuming that the sub-subtopic ‘employment and inclusion of persons with disabilities’ is
assessed to be material, the undertaking must disclose the metric ‘percentage of persons with
disabilities amongst its employees subject to legal restrictions on the collection of data’ (ESRS S1
paragraph 79). While this is not a requirement, it may provide a breakdown by gender as an
optional good practice (ESRS S1 paragraph 80).
(3) Does the materiality assessment take precedence over ESRS 1 paragraph 18?
No, for optional disclosures the materiality assessment does not take precedence over ESRS 1
paragraph 18. This means that for a topic that is assessed as material (see previous example on
S1-12) it is optional, but the undertaking is encouraged to disclose a ‘may’ datapoint also if the
information pertaining to the datapoint in question is material.
See also the paragraph that is in the answer to question (1) above.
(5) Can an undertaking disregard the disclosure of a ‘may disclose’ datapoint if the
datapoint is material?
Yes, see example on ESRS S1-12. This is due to the nature of the ‘may’ datapoint (a voluntary
datapoint to encourage good practice).
(6) What is the relevance of ESRS 1 paragraph 18 if materiality takes precedence over
ESRS 1 paragraph 18?
ESRS 1 paragraph 18 illustrates the nature or drafting convention used for the datapoints, and it
has to be applied in conjunction with the materiality considerations – i.e. the ‘shall’ datapoints
are still subject to materiality assessment.
Question ID 106 - Entity-specific guidance and examples
Release date
February 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 13 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question asked
What are concrete examples of potential entity-specific sustainability matters and any guidance
related to finding and dealing with such?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 10.1 and paragraphs 10, AR 4 and AR 5
Key terms
Entity-specific disclosures
Background
ESRS 1 chapter 10.1 ‘Transitional provision related to entity-specific disclosures’ states in its
paragraphs the following:
‘130. The extent to which sustainability matters are covered by ESRS is expected to evolve as
further Disclosure Requirements are developed. Therefore, the need for entity-specific
disclosures is likely to decrease over time, in particular as a result of the future adoption of sector
specific standards.
131. When defining its entity-specific disclosures, the undertaking may adopt transitional
measures for their preparation in the first three annual sustainability statements under which it
may as a priority:
(a) introduce in its reporting those entity-specific disclosures that it reported in prior periods, if
these disclosures meet or are adapted to meet the qualitative characteristics of information
referred to under chapter 2 of this Standard; and
(b) complement its disclosures prepared on the basis of the topical ESRS with an appropriate set
of additional disclosures to cover sustainability matters that are material for the undertaking
in its sector(s), using available best practice and/or available frameworks or reporting
standards, such as IFRS industry-based guidance and GRI Sector Standards.’
ESRS 1 paragraph AR 4 and 5 state:
‘AR 4. When developing its entity-specific disclosures, the undertaking shall carefully consider:
comparability between undertakings, while still ensuring relevance of the information provided,
recognising that comparability may be limited for entity-specific disclosures. The undertaking shall
consider whether the available and relevant frameworks, initiatives, reporting standards and
benchmarks (such as technical material issued by the International Sustainability Standards Board
or the Global Reporting Initiative) provide elements that can support comparability to the
maximum extent possible.
AR 5. Further guidance for developing entity-specific disclosures can be found by considering the
information required under topical ESRS that addresses similar sustainability matters.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 14 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Answer
At this stage, it is not possible to provide concrete examples as this will depends on facts and
circumstances of the reporting undertaking, including the sector(s) it is operating in. Sector-
specific sustainability matters will be addressed in the future sector standards still to be finalized.
When developing entity-specific disclosures (ESRS 1, paragraph 11), ESRS 1 points to ‘available
and relevant frameworks, initiatives, standards, benchmarks’. Two examples are provided as
possible sources of relevant entity-specific disclosures (see ESRS 1 paragraph 131 (b)): the IFRS
industry-based guidance and the GRI Sector Standards.
The IFRS industry-based guidance is the former SASB standards; they can be found here:
https://sasb.org/standards/download/ and GRI Sector Standards can be downloaded from
https://www.globalreporting.org/standards/sector-program/
These two sources offer examples of sector-specific information that could complement on an
entity-specific basis the information required in sector-agnostic ESRS depending on the relevant
sector.
In general, there are two types of instances that will give rise to entity-specific information:
(a) when the undertaking identifies a material matter that is not covered by Disclosure
Requirements in ESRS; and
(b) when, for a matter that is covered by Disclosure Requirements in ESRS, the undertaking
concludes that in order to provide information that meets the qualitative characteristics
of the information (Appendix B of ESRS 1) additional disclosures need to be included. This
may be the case for a specific aspect of a sub-subtopic (see AR 16 of ESRS 1) when such a
sub-subtopic is covered in ESRS but the specific aspects (i.e., an additional level of
granularity) is not covered. This may also be the case for a specific metric that is not
included in ESRS, but considering the specific facts and circumstances of the undertaking,
this metric is necessary in order to provide the appropriate quality of information.
The entity-specific information may relate to the description of a material impact, risk or
opportunity (along the lines of ESRS 2 SBM 3), it may relate to policies, actions and targets that
the undertaking has set, or it may relate to metrics.
Question ID 109 - Bold text and ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
Is the ‘bolded paragraph’ following each ESRS Disclosure Requirement a disclosure that the
undertaking has to respond to? Or is it simply a ‘headline’ that prescribes what the paragraph will
contain once all the individual datapoints are completed? See also ESRS E1 Disclosure
Requirement E1-6.
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 and all topical ESRS, especially ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 15 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Key terms
‘Bolded paragraph’; ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6
Background
In ESRS 2 and in the topical ESRS, Disclosure Requirements are generally followed by a ‘bold
paragraph’ stating ‘The undertaking shall disclose . . .’ with a general statement of the information
that needs to be disclosed under the respective Disclosure Requirement.
The ‘bold paragraph’ is followed by an objective paragraph, which is followed by more detailed
paragraphs containing the datapoints that must be disclosed under the respective Disclosure
Requirement and further specifications of the information being requested.
In the case of ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6, this is as follows:
ESRS E1 paragraph 44 provides a ‘bold paragraph’ with the general statement of the requirement
that needs to be satisfied under ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6.;
ESRS E1 paragraph 45 outlines the objective of the disclosure requirement; and
ESRS E1 paragraphs 46-52 further specify information to be included when disclosing on ESRS E1
paragraph 44.
This is illustrated as follows:
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 16 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 17 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Answer
The ‘bold paragraph’ that introduces each Disclosure Requirement is not simply a headline. It is a
general statement of what needs to be disclosed under the respective Disclosure Requirement.
The information provided under a Disclosure Requirement should satisfy the overall objective of
it, as stated in the paragraph following the bold paragraph (‘the objective of this Disclosure
Requirement is . . .’).
The subsequent paragraphs include a list of datapoints (‘the disclosure provided under paragraph
XXX shall include . . .’). This list is generally sufficient to meet the disclosure requirements;
however, such a list cannot be assumed to be exhaustive, as meeting the disclosure requirement
takes precedent over the list of datapoints.
In providing the disclosure that corresponds to the list of individual datapoints (if applicable per
the related Application Requirements), it is assumed that both the following are met:
(c)requirements of the ‘bold paragraph’; and
(d) objective as stated in the subsequent paragraph.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 18 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
The ‘bold paragraph’ of ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6 (i.e., ESRS E1 paragraph 44) covers
Scope 1, 2 and 3 and total GHG emissions. The objective of the Disclosure Requirements also
covers Scope 1, 2 and 3 and total GHG emissions. ESRS E1 paragraph 52 mentions the total GHG
emissions. The total GHG emissions shall be reported as it is included in both the bold paragraph
and the objective.
Question ID 157 - ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement GOV, and
specification in the topical ESRS
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
When a topical standard does not include Disclosure Requirements that are applicable jointly with
ESRS 2 (ref. to Appendix C of ESRS 2), are ESRS 2 requirements applicable in relation to that topic?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraphs 9 and 29; ESRS 2 GOV 1 to 5; ESRS E1 paragraph 13
Key terms
ESRS 2 related disclosures in topical standards
Background
The original question received was reworded to the above question; the original question was: ‘If
there is no additional guidance, then do the other disclosure requirements do not apply to the
topical standard (meaning GOV 1 and GOV 2 do not apply)? Or do they all still apply, but there is
just more guidance to follow (such that there is more specific guidance for GOV 3 specifically when
reporting on E1)?’
In the architecture of the ESRS, the two cross-cutting standards ESRS 1 General Requirements and
ESRS 2 General Disclosures are complemented by ten topical standards (E, S and G). ESRS 1
paragraph 9 states: ‘Topical ESRS can include specific requirements that complement the general
level Disclosure Requirements of ESRS 2. ESRS 2 Appendix C Disclosure/Application Requirements
in topical ESRS that are applicable jointly with ESRS 2 General Disclosures provides a list of the
additional requirements in topical ESRS that the undertaking shall apply in conjunction with the
general level disclosure requirements of ESRS 2.’
ESRS 2 disclosure requirements are ‘cross-cutting in nature’, so they do not refer to a specific topic,
but some of them also have topical specifications in the topical standards as explained in ESRS 2
Appendix C. An example is ESRS 2 GOV-3 ‘Integration of sustainability-related performance in
incentive schemes’: this disclosure requirement (paragraphs 27-29) has a specification in the
climate topical standard ESRS E1 paragraph 13.
ESRS E1 paragraph 13: ‘The undertaking shall disclose whether and how climate-related
considerations are factored into the remuneration of members of the administrative,
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 19 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
management and supervisory bodies , including if their performance has been assessed against
the GHG emission reduction targets reported under Disclosure Requirement E1-4 and the
percentage of the remuneration recognised in the current period that is linked to climate related
considerations, with an explanation of what the climate considerations are.’
A basic principle is that the requirements in the topical standards should be read and applied in
conjunction with the cross-cutting standards.
Furthermore, all topical standards are subject to materiality assessment.
Answer
Disclosure Requirements (DRs), including their datapoints, in the cross-cutting standard ESRS 2
General Disclosures are to be reported irrespective of the outcome of the materiality assessment
(for example, GOV-1, GOV-2, GOV-3, GOV-4, and GOV-5), see ESRS 1 paragraph 29. The content of
ESRS 2 (with the exception of MDR – P, A, T) is not intended to provide a content to be followed
in each and every topic, but it provides content that is to be provided at corporate/general level
(across all the topics).
All topical standards should be read in conjunction with the cross-cutting standards ESRS 1 and
ESRS 2, as these apply to the sustainability statement as a whole.
There are datapoints related to the ESRS 2 DRs in some of the topical standards. These are outlined
in the table in ESRS 2 Appendix C, Disclosure and Application Requirements in topical ESRS that
are applicable in conjunction with ESRS 2 General disclosures. They include GOV-1 in ESRS G1
‘Business conduct’, paragraph 5, and GOV-3 in ESRS E1 ‘Climate change’, paragraph 13.
The topical specifications of ESRS 2 DRs listed in Appendix C of ESRS 2 provide additional
datapoints that shall be included and/or additional considerations that the undertaking has to
take into account when preparing the respective ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirements.
In terms of the scope of the materiality assessment:
(e) ESRS 1 paragraph 29 specifies the Disclosure Requirements always to be included
irrespective of the outcome of materiality. These include the ESRS 2 IRO-1 requirements
(listed in Appendix C of ESRS 2) that are located in the topical standards, which are to be
applied also if the respective topic is not material.
(f) Other ESRS 2 specifications (listed in Appendix C of ESRS 2) and the other disclosure
requirements located in topical standards are subject to materiality assessment. This
implies that the undertaking only has to report on them when the respective topic is
considered material. This avoids having to report, for example, on GOV-1 ‘Business
conduct’ (topical standard) if the topic ‘Business conduct’ has been determined not to be
material to the undertaking.
(g) All narrative disclosures including those in ESRS 2 should be applied with consideration
to paragraph 31 of ESRS 1, which sets the criteria for assessing the materiality of
information to be provided and ultimately affect the granularity of the reported
information.
When a Disclosure Requirement in ESRS 2 does not have topical specifications, ESRS 2 has to be
applied as specified in ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement. No additional datapoints to those in ESRS
2 or considerations at topical level apply in these cases. If ESRS 2 does not set topical specifications
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 20 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
for a given topic, ESRS SBM-3 requires nevertheless to disclose material impacts, risks and
opportunities for that material topic.
Question ID 429 – Entity-specific and ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirements
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
When addressing the required entity-specific disclosure, which are the datapoints or the
Disclosure Requirements to consider from ESRS 2?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraphs 11, 30, 60 and 70
Key terms
Entity-specific disclosures
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 11 states: ‘In addition to the disclosure requirements laid down in the three
categories of ESRS, when an undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not
covered or not covered with sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific
facts and circumstances, it shall provide additional entity-specific disclosures to enable users to
understand the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities. Application
requirements AR 1 to AR 5 provide further guidance regarding entity-specific disclosures.’
In particular, ESRS paragraph AR 2 states: ‘When developing entity-specific disclosures, the
undertaking shall ensure that … (b) its disclosures include, where applicable, all material
information related to the reporting areas of governance; strategy; impact, risk and opportunity
management; and metrics and targets (see ESRS 2 chapters 2 to 5).’
ESRS 1 paragraph 30 states: ‘When the undertaking concludes that a sustainability matter is
material as a result of its materiality assessment on which ESRS 2 IRO-1, IRO-2 and SBM-3 set
disclosure requirements, it shall:
(a) disclose information according to the Disclosure Requirements (including Application
Requirements) related to that specific sustainability matter in the corresponding topical
and sector-specific ESRS; and
(b) disclose additional entity-specific disclosures (see paragraph 11 and AR 1 to AR 5 of this
Standard) when the material sustainability matter is not covered by an ESRS or is covered
with insufficient granularity.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 12 states the following regarding ‘Reporting areas and minimum content
disclosure requirements on policies, actions, targets and metrics’: ‘The Disclosure Requirements
in ESRS 2 in topical ESRS and in sector-specific ESRS are structured into the following reporting
areas:
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 21 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(a) Governance (GOV): the governance processes controls and procedures used to monitor,
manage and oversee impacts, risks and opportunities (see ESRS 2 Chapter 2 Governance);
(b) Strategy (SBM): how the undertaking’s strategy and business model interact with its
material impacts, risks and opportunities, including how the undertaking addresses those
impacts, risks and opportunities (see ESRS 2 Chapter 3 Strategy);
(c) Impact, risk and opportunity management (IRO): the process(es) by which the
undertaking:
a. identifies impacts, risks and opportunities and assesses their materiality (see
IRO-1 in Section 4.1 of ESRS 2);
b. manages material sustainability matters through policies and actions (see
Section 4.2 of ESRS 2);
(d) Metrics and targets (MT): the undertaking’s performance including targets it has set and
progress towards meeting them (see ESRS 2 Chapter 5 Metrics and targets).’
ESRS 2 paragraph 60 on minimum disclosure requirements on policies and actions states: ‘This
section sets out minimum disclosure requirements to be included when the undertaking discloses
information on its policies and actions to prevent, mitigate and remediate actual and potential
material impacts, to address material risks and/or to pursue material opportunities (collectively,
to “manage material sustainability matters”). They shall be applied together with the Disclosure
Requirements, including Application Requirements, provided in the relevant topical and sector-
specific ESRS. They shall also be applied when the undertaking prepares entity-specific
disclosures.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 70 on metrics and targets states: ‘This chapter sets out Minimum Disclosure
Requirements that shall be included when the undertaking discloses information on its metrics
and targets related to each material sustainability matter. They shall be applied together with the
Disclosure Requirements, including Application Requirements, provided in the relevant topical
ESRS. They shall also be applied when the undertaking prepares entity-specific disclosures.’
Answer
The datapoints or the Disclosure Requirements from ESRS 2 to consider, if applicable, when
addressing a required entity-specific disclosure are: ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement GOV-1 to
GOV-5, SBM-1 to SBM-3, IRO-1 and the Minimum Disclosure Requirements on policies and actions
on metrics and targets, respectively.
ESRS 1 paragraph AR 1 to 5 provides Application Requirements on entity-specific disclosures.
In situations where a sustainability matter is not covered by an ESRS, the entity-specific
disclosures to consider from ESRS 2 could potentially relate to any reporting area of ESRS 2 (for
the reporting areas of ESRS 2, see ESRS 1 paragraph 12), that is:
(a) governance;
(b) strategy;
(c) impact, risk and opportunity management; and
(d) metrics and targets.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 22 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
This is insofar as information regarding the entity-specific sustainability matter and its impact,
risk and opportunity is relevant (ESRS 1 paragraph 31) and it needs to be disclosed under the
ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirements.
Therefore, if applicable, impacts, risks and opportunities of the entity-specific matter could be
addressed by the following ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirements:
(a) GOV-1: regarding roles and responsibilities and access to expertise and skills with regard
to the entity-specific sustainability matter;
(b) GOV-2: regarding information related to the entity-specific sustainability matter provided
to and addressed by the undertaking’s administrative, management and supervisory
bodies;
(c) GOV-3: regarding integration of the entity-specific sustainability matter in incentive
schemes;
(d) GOV-4: regarding entity-specific due diligence processes;
(e) GOV-5: regarding risk management and internal controls over the sustainability process,
including the entity-specific sustainability matter;
(f) SBM-1: regarding its strategy relating to the entity-specific sustainability matter;
(g) SBM-2: regarding interests and views of stakeholders with respect to the entity-specific
sustainability matter;
(h) SBM-3: regarding the description, the interaction with strategy and business model and
other information required by paragraph 48 of ESRS 2 on the material impacts, risks and
opportunities connected with the entity-specific matter (including ESRS 2 paragraph 48
(h)); and
(i) IRO-1: regarding a description of the process to identify and assess the entity-specific
material impacts, risk and opportunities.
In addition (following ESRS 1 paragraph AR 2):
(a) policies, actions and targets shall be included where applicable, i.e. when the undertaking
has them in place, to manage the relevant entity-specific matter/IRO; and
(b) metrics shall be included where applicable. In assessing when this is applicable, the
reference is ESRS 1 AR 1: the entity-specific disclosures shall enable users to understand
the undertaking’s material IROs. In general, to provide a relevant and fair representation
of an impact, risk or opportunity, metrics are useful and should be included.
ESRS paragraph AR 3 supports the determination of when entity-specific metrics are useful, i.e.:
(a) when they support the understanding of (1) how effective the practices are in reducing
negative impacts and increasing positive impacts and (2) how likely the financial effects
arising from risks and opportunities are;
(b) when they result in a reliable outcome (see ESRS 1 paragraph AR 3 (b)); and
(c) when they are accompanied by sufficient contextual information (see ESRS 1 paragraph
AR 3 (c)).
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 23 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS 2 Minimum Disclosure Requirements on policies and actions (ESRS 2 paragraph 60) and
metrics and targets (ESRS 2 paragraph 70) shall be applied in the preparation of this disclosure.
Question ID 442 – Entity-specific metrics
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Do entity-specific metrics need to be developed for a topic that is covered in the standards but is
only for a specific part of the value chain?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraphs 11, 30, AR 1-5 and AR 16; ESRS 2 paragraphs 48 (h) and 51; and ESRS 2 MDR
Key terms
Entity-specific disclosure on matters not covered by ESRS Disclosure Requirements
Background
The submitter provided the following background for the question: ‘... for example, a company
has identified a matter as material for which the topic of water is relevant in the value chain. In
the ESRS E3 standard, the topic of water in the value chain is covered by datapoints in the areas
of Policies, Targets and Actions. However, the associated metric relates exclusively to the
company’s own business activities (ESRS E3 paragraph 28-29). Can it now be deduced from
paragraph 30 (b) in ESRS 1 that the company must develop an entity-specific metric for this matter
because there is insufficient “granularity” here, or has the EU deliberately limited the metric to
its own business activities so that no metric for water use in the value chain has to be explicitly
developed?’
ESRS 1 paragraph 11 states: ‘In addition to the disclosure requirements laid down in the three
categories of ESRS, when an undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not
covered or not covered with sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific
facts and circumstances, it shall provide additional entity-specific disclosures to enable users to
understand the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities. Application
requirements AR 1 to AR 5 provide further guidance regarding entity-specific disclosures.’
ESRS 1 paragraphs AR 1 and AR 2 state: ‘AR 1. The entity-specific disclosures shall enable users to
understand the undertaking’s impacts, risks and opportunities in relation to environmental, social
or governance matters.
AR 2. When developing entity-specific disclosures, the undertaking shall ensure that:
(a) the disclosures meet the qualitative characteristics of information as set out in chapter
2 Qualitative characteristics of information; and
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 24 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(b) its disclosures include where applicable all material information related to the reporting
areas of governance; strategy; impact, risk and opportunity management; and metrics
and targets (see ESRS 2 chapters 2 to 5).’
ESRS 1 paragraph 65 states: ‘The undertaking shall include material value chain information when
this is necessary to:
(a) allow users of sustainability statements to understand the undertaking’s material
impacts, risks and opportunities; and/or
(b) produce a set of information that meets the qualitative characteristics of information (see
Appendix B of this Standard).’
Answer
Entity-specific disclosure shall be provided in addition to the Disclosure Requirements laid down
in the three categories of ESRS (i.e., cross-cutting, topical and sector-specific standards) when an
undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not covered or not covered with
sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific facts and circumstances (ESRS
1 paragraph 11).
If an undertaking has concluded that a topic is material in its value chain, but the relevant topical
standard only requires to disclose metrics related to own operations, the provision of metrics that
cover specifically the value chain shall be considered and provided if such metrics are necessary
according to paragraph 11 of ESRS 1. Sector ESRS may introduce additional metrics, including on
the value chain.
ESRS 1 chapter 2 Qualitative characteristics of information
Question ID 337 – Metrics calculation – same level of precision
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
When calculating metrics for sustainability matters that are material for a group, do the data of
all subsidiaries have to be considered with the same level of accuracy even if the matter is not
material for some subsidiaries of the group?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 2 Qualitative characteristics of information
Key terms
Metrics calculation – same level of accuracy
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 25 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
The submitter provided the following background for his question: ‘The following example refers
to metrics in the context of water and marine resources. However, it should be noted that the
question raised similarly applies to all sustainability matters and metrics and that the subtopic
“water” was chosen for illustration purposes only.
Example: The main business of a group is manufacturing and selling a specific product, which is
produced in a water-intensive production process in various own facilities. The group further
owns and operates several sales corporations abroad, with a limited number of employees
working in offices not being involved in production-related activities. The group determines that
all topics and subtopics mentioned in ESRS E3 on water and marine resources are material and
concludes that all metrics governed by ESRS E3 need to be disclosed.
Furthermore, based on a preliminary estimate, the group notes that its production facilities will
bear the vast majority of the amounts of all metric data on this topic, whereas the sales
corporations would account for a marginal portion of those metrics, which consequently the
group considers not to be material. However, the group is aware of the requirement to calculate
the metrics based on own operations, i.e., including the parent company and all the subsidiaries
of the group. Therefore, it has established processes and procedures to measure directly and with
precision the part of the metrics attributable to the group’s production facilities, whereas it
continues to determine the part of the metrics attributable to its sales corporations based on
estimations such as average per capita figures. The total metrics disclosed is therefore the total
of the portion directly measured and a respective estimate.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 87 states: ’When quantitative metrics and monetary amounts including
upstream and downstream value chain information (see chapter 5 of this Standard) cannot be
measured directly and can only be estimated, measurement uncertainty may arise.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 89 states: ‘The use of reasonable assumptions and estimates including scenario
or sensitivity analysis is an essential part of preparing sustainability-related information and does
not undermine the usefulness of that information, provided that the assumptions and estimates
are accurately described and explained. Even a high level of measurement uncertainty would not
necessarily prevent such an assumption or estimate from providing useful information or meeting
the qualitative characteristics of information (see Appendix B of this Standard).’
Answer
When providing metrics data, the undertaking is expected to comply with the text of ESRS by
providing the metric as defined in the Disclosure Requirement:
(a) data from all subsidiaries need to be included (unless the Disclosure Requirement of the
metric provides otherwise; see IG 1 Materiality assessment: FAQ 22 – Is a multi-sector
group required to include metrics for the entire group or only data related to the material
IRO?); and
(b) the use of estimates is subject to conditions (see ESRS 1 paragraphs 87 and 89), including
the need to consider the qualitative characteristics (ESRS 1 chapter 2).
In the example mentioned by the submitter, the undertaking will have to consider whether
precisely measuring the portion of the metrics attributable to the production facility – and using
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 26 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
an estimate for the portion attributable to the sales corporation – will result in a degree of
accuracy for the entire metric that is consistent with the characteristics of information quality.
See also Implementation Guidance EFRAG IG 1 Materiality Assessment – FAQ 18: Does the
undertaking use the same criteria when defining the level of disaggregation across all IROs? which
deals with related issues.
Question ID 863 – Metrics calculation – Annual average
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
When calculating metrics, including value chain metrics, do we have to consider downstream
positions for all four quarters (as of 31.03, 30.06, 30.09, 31.12)?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 2 and paragraph 89; all topical ESRS
Key terms
Metrics calculation; annual average
Background
[The original question asked, ‘When calculating Indicators including Value Chain for the financial
sector (Capital markets, Insurance), do we have to consider downstream positions for all four
quarters (as of 31.03, 30.06, 30.09, 31.12)?’ was referring to metrics calculation in the financial
sector but, to be more general, the question was changed to the above.
As background to the question, the submitter provided the following: ‘Background is that SFDR
requires calculating PAIs for all relevant positions as per quarter end and then build an average.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 19 states: ‘When preparing its sustainability statement, the undertaking shall
apply:
(a) the fundamental qualitative characteristics of information, i.e. relevance and faithful
representation; and
(b) the enhancing qualitative characteristics of information, i.e. comparability,
verifiability and understandability.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 89 states: ‘The use of reasonable assumptions and estimates, including scenario
or sensitivity analysis, is an essential part of preparing sustainability-related information and does
not undermine the usefulness of that information, provided that the assumptions and estimates
are accurately described and explained. Even a high level of measurement uncertainty would not
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 27 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
necessarily prevent such an assumption or estimate from providing useful information or meeting
the qualitative characteristics of information (see Appendix B of this Standard).’
Answer
ESRS do not require to calculate annual averages based on quarterly figures as required in
Article 6 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/363.
Some metrics require the calculation of annual averages (e.g. ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-
6 – Characteristics of the undertaking’s employees). ESRS do not prescribe how to calculate annual
averages as long as the calculation method results in information that meets the qualitative
characteristics of information (ESRS 1 Chapter 2; see also ESRS 1 paragraph 89).
Supporting material
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/363 of 31 October 2022 states in Article 6:
‘Description of the principal adverse impacts of investment decisions on sustainability factors … 3.
Financial market participants shall include in the columns ‘Impact’ in the section ‘Description of
the principal adverse impacts on sustainability factors’ in Table 1 of Annex I, figure on impact as
the average of impacts on 31 March, 30 June, 30 September and 31 December of each period
from 1 January to 31 December.’
ESRS 1 chapter 3 Double materiality as the basis for sustainability
disclosures
Reference to Implementation Guidance 1 Materiality Assessment
IG 1 Materiality Assessment
Question ID 37 - Positive impact only
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Can a sustainability matter be material from a positive impact perspective only?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 3.4; ESRS 1 paragraph 43 and 46
Key terms
Materiality, positive impact only material
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 28 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
The question received by the submitter: ‘Can an impact be material if it is material from a positive
impact perspective only?’ was reworded to the above question to be clearer.
Background as provided by the submitter:
‘It is essential that when I have evaluated and qualitatively assessed the actual/potential negative
and positive effects on human beings and the environment, I have concluded that the topic is
irrelevant in terms of actual negative impacts and also irrelevant in terms of actual positive
impacts. However, it is critical from the perspective of potential positive impacts. Is my topic then
considered significant?’
ESRS 1 paragraph 43 states: ‘A sustainability matter is material from an impact perspective when
it pertains to the undertaking’s material actual or potential, positive or negative impacts on people
or the environment over the short-, medium- or long-term.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 46 states the criteria on which positive impacts materiality are based: ‘For
positive impacts, materiality is based on:
(a) the scale and scope of the impact for actual impacts; and
(b) the scale, scope and likelihood of the impact for potential impacts.’
Answer
Yes, a sustainability matter can be material from a positive impact perspective only.
Based on the definition in ESRS 1 paragraph 43, a sustainability matter is material when it
pertains:
(h) to material actual or potential impacts or
(i) to material positive or negative impacts.
Positive impacts can be either actual or potential.
ESRS 1 chapter 3.4 defines the criteria used to assess materiality. For actual positive impacts, the
criteria are scale and scope. In addition, for potential positive impacts likelihood is considered.
ESRS 1 paragraph 45 describes the relationship between negative impacts and the due diligence
process defined in international instruments (i.e., the UN Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights and the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises). In particular, due diligence
focuses on negative or adverse impacts on people and the environment, but this does not mean
that impact materiality is limited to negative impacts under ESRS reporting.
Question ID 162 - Minimum number of material matters
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
Is there a minimum number of material sustainability matters to be disclosed in the sustainability
statement of the undertaking?
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 29 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 3
Key terms
Minimum number of material sustainability matters
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 28 states: ‘A sustainability matter is “material” when it meets the criteria defined
for impact materiality . . . or financial materiality . . . or both.’
IG 1 Materiality assessment paragraph 1 states: ‘The ESRS sustainability statement shall include
relevant and faithful information about all impacts, risks and opportunities (also referred to as
IROs) across environmental, social and governance matters determined to be material from the
impact materiality perspective, the financial materiality perspective or both. The materiality
assessment is the process by which the undertaking determines material information on
sustainability IROs. This is achieved by the determination of material matters and material
information to be reported. The performance of a materiality assessment based on objective
criteria is pivotal to sustainability reporting. The undertaking will use judgement when applying
the criteria, and the related explanations are expected to provide transparency from the
undertaking to the users of the sustainability statement.’
The Application Requirements in Appendix A of ESRS include a list of sustainability matters
covered in ESRS.
Answer
There is no minimum (or maximum) number of material sustainability matters required by ESRS,
as materiality is based on the undertaking’s specific facts and circumstances.
Materiality is a principles-based concept. IG 1 Materiality assessment provides non-authoritative
guidance on how to conduct the materiality assessment. Materiality of a sustainability matter for
an undertaking depends on the specific facts and circumstances related to its strategy, business
model, own operations and value chain. Based on those specific facts and circumstances, a
number of material impacts, risks and opportunities will be identified as a result of the materiality
assessment.
Question ID 172 – Materiality assessment – private equity structures
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Which material sustainability matters must be identified and assessed in private equity structures
having general and limited partners?
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 30 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapters 5.1 Reporting undertaking and value chain and 7.6 Consolidated reporting and
subsidiary exemption
Key terms
Materiality assessment; private equity structures; general and limited partner
Background
Private equity (PE) structures usually have a general partner (GP) and limited partners (LPs). GP
refers to the PE firm that manages a private equity fund. These funds are usually set up as general
partnerships with the third-party investors being the limited partners and the PE firm acting as
the GP. In addition to raising the funds and administering the daily operations of the fund, the GP
is responsible for identifying and closing on investments in portfolio companies of the private
equity fund, assisting the portfolio company management teams in maximising value and
liquidating investments so distributions can be made from the partnership to the LPs. LPs are the
ones who have arranged and invested the capital for the private equity fund but who are not really
concerned about the daily maintenance of the fund, whereas GPs are investment professionals
who are vested with the responsibility of making decisions with respect to the investments.
To answer the question above, it is assumed that neither the GP nor the LPs consolidate the
portfolio company in their respective financial statements as neither of them financially control
the portfolio company.
ESRS 1 paragraph 62: ‘The sustainability statement shall be for the same reporting undertaking as
the financial statements.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 63: ‘The information about the reporting undertaking provided in the
sustainability statement shall be extended to include information on the material impacts, risks
and opportunities connected with the undertaking through its direct and indirect business
relationships in the upstream and/or downstream value chain (“value chain information”). …’
Answer
General and limited partners of private equity structures must identify and assess material
sustainability matters in their own operations and in their value chain.
If neither the general partner nor the limited partner/s consolidate the portfolio company/ies in
their respective financial statements because neither of them exercises financial control over the
portfolio company/ies, then impacts, risks and opportunities of the portfolio company/ies are not
part of the own operations of the general partner nor of the limited partner/s for the purposes
of the sustainability statement (See also Implementation Guidance EFRAG IG 2 Value Chain
chapter 2.3 From own operations to value chain).
The general partner typically provides management services to the portfolio company/ies
through the private equity fund. Therefore, in the absence also of financial control, the portfolio
company/ies are considered business relationships in the general partner’s value chain.
Accordingly, the general partner shall identify and assess material impacts, risks and
opportunities connected to the portfolio company in its downstream value chain.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 31 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
The limited partner typically provides funds for its investments in portfolio companies. Please
refer to Implementation Guidance EFRAG IG 2 Value Chain: FAQ 2: Are financial assets (loans,
equity, and debt instruments) considered business relationships that trigger value chain
information?
To note: More detailed guidance is expected in future sector standards. ID 285 Asset managers,
investment entities, scope of sustainability statement deals with a question about the scope of
the sustainability statement assuming that the portfolio company is controlled by the asset
manager / the holding company.
Question ID 185 – Objective evidence and stakeholders’ opinion
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
When assessing the materiality of a sustainability matter, is the focus on stakeholder opinions or
on objective evidence?
ESRS reference
IG 1 Materiality assessment chapter 3.5 Role and approach to stakeholders in the materiality
assessment process; FAQ 10 Should the assessment of IROs rely on quantitative information?; FAQ
15 Do the ESRS mandate to actively engage in dialogue with affected stakeholders for the
materiality assessment process?; and FAQ 16 Can the undertaking prioritise some categories of
stakeholders for the materiality assessment process? How?
Key terms
Materiality assessment; stakeholder opinion; objective evidence
Background
To better address the issue mentioned by the submitter, it was agreed to change the question
that was received from ‘When evaluating sustainability matters, is the focus on stakeholder
opinions or on objective evidence?’ to the question above.
ESRS 1 paragraph 24 states: ‘Engagement with affected stakeholders is central to the
undertaking’s ongoing due diligence process … and sustainability materiality assessment.’
IG 1 Materiality assessment - FAQ 10 Should the assessment of IROs rely on quantitative
information? (paragraphs 180 to 183) states:
‘180. Where possible, yes, as quantitative measures of IROs are objective evidence of their
materiality. The emphasis on objective and quantitative information does not mean to
imply that the information from affected stakeholders should be disregarded.
181. The level of comfort sought by the undertaking from quantitative information depends on
whether there is scientific validated data and on consensus reached on the given impact.
For example, global reports or industry information on a given topic, such as negative
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 32 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
impacts on biodiversity loss, could provide the quantitative information needed without
the need for the undertaking to incur in additional research or data collection costs.
182. Quantitative information is not always available or may result in additional costs.
Whenever a qualitative analysis is sufficient for the undertaking to reasonably conclude
that a matter is “not material” or is “material”, additional quantitative information would
not add value to the materiality assessment. As the materiality assessment process evolves
over time, the undertaking may redefine the balance between qualitative or quantitative
information.
183. Quantitative information would, however, be of interest where a topic is on the edge of
being material/non-material based on qualitative information and/or where there are
diverse views. In that case, quantification could corroborate the conclusion.’
IG 1 Materiality assessment FAQ 15 Do the ESRS mandate to actively engage in dialogue with
affected stakeholders for the materiality assessment process? states: ‘The ESRS require disclosure
on the materiality assessment and its outcomes but do not mandate specific behaviour on
stakeholder engagement or the due diligence process.’
IG 1 Materiality assessment FAQ 16 Can the undertaking prioritise some categories of
stakeholders for the materiality assessment process? How? states: ‘Engagement with affected
stakeholders helps the undertaking to understand which sustainability matters are sources of
concern for the respective stakeholders and how they are affected. This information may be
useful input for the assessment.’
Answer
When assessing the materiality of a sustainability matter, there is no conflict between
consideration of views of affected stakeholders and objective evidence. The purpose of both is to
get an understanding of the severity (and likelihood) of impacts to present them faithfully in the
sustainability statement. Depending on the circumstances, this may or may not require
engagement with affected stakeholders.
The materiality analysis should be driven as much as possible by objective data and evidence.
Scientific evidence is the focus in some cases depending on the type of topic and availability of
such evidence. Quantitative/scientific data on the impact may or may not also be available.
Widespread/systemic impacts often tend to be well documented, and there is often a consensus
on their severity.
In other cases, depending on the topic the views of affected stakeholders are a source of
supporting evidence for impact materiality. However, not all stakeholder opinions are equally
relevant for the materiality analysis. Relevance depends on how much the stakeholders are
affected (severity – and likelihood – of impacts). Understanding entity-specific impacts and/or the
manifestation of widespread/systemic impacts in particular contexts and situations requires
more careful consideration of specific circumstances, including whether and how people or the
environment are affected.
Elements useful to address this question can be found in IG 1 Materiality assessment chapters 3.5
Role and approach to stakeholders in the materiality assessment process and 5.4 FAQ on
stakeholder engagement – impact materiality.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 33 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question ID 438 – Treatment of non-material datapoints, e.g.
radioactive waste – can it be a non-material datapoint?
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Is it necessary to report radioactive waste from analytical devices and tracer applications?
ESRS Reference
ESRS E5 paragraph 39; ESRS 1 paragraph 34, ESRS 2 paragraph 56
Key terms
Waste; radioactive waste; datapoint, non-material
Background
The submitter provided the following background: ‘Reporting all radioactive waste according to
2022/70/Euratom would include radioactive tracers and analytical devices and sensors. Reporting
of these wastes should be excluded because they are present in very small amounts and already
locally reported under applicable legislation. Outside the EU, the definition of radioactive waste
may also be different from 2022/70/Euratom.’
ESRS E5 paragraph 39 states: ‘The undertaking shall also disclose the total amount of hazardous
waste and radioactive waste generated by the undertaking, where radioactive waste is defined in
Article 3(7) of Council Directive 2011/70/Euratom as follows: “radioactive waste” means
radioactive material in gaseous, liquid or solid form for which no further use is foreseen or
considered by the Member State or by a legal or natural person whose decision is accepted by the
Member State, and which is regulated as radioactive waste by a competent regulatory authority
under the legislative and regulatory framework of the Member State’.
ESRS 1 paragraph 34 states: ‘When disclosing information on metrics for a material sustainability
matter according to the Metrics and Targets section of the relevant topical ESRS, the undertaking:
(a) shall include the information prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement if it assesses such
information to be material; and
(a) may omit the information prescribed by a datapoint of a Disclosure Requirement if it
assesses such information to be not material and concludes that such information is not
needed to meet the objective of the Disclosure Requirement.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 56 states: ‘The undertaking shall also include a table of all the datapoints that
derive from other EU legislation as listed in Appendix B of this standard, indicating where they can
be found in the sustainability statement and including those that the undertaking has assessed as
not material, in which case the undertaking shall indicate “not material” in the table in accordance
with ESRS 1 paragraph 35.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 34 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Answer
It depends on materiality whether it is necessary to report radioactive waste.
The Disclosure Requirement of ESRS E5-5 – Resource outflow with the datapoints’ total amount
of hazardous waste and radioactive waste (paragraph 39) is – as all the topical Disclosure
Requirements – subject to double materiality and to the materiality of information as stipulated
in ESRS 1 Chapter 3 – Double materiality as the basis for sustainability disclosures:
(a) Is the ‘waste’ subtopic material? – The undertaking shall only disclose the datapoints of
the waste subtopic of ESRS E5 if considered material under double materiality (see ESRS 1
Chapter 3.3 Double materiality); and if so,
(b) does the datapoint provide material information? – The metrics required to be disclosed
by ESRS E5-5 Waste, including ‘the total amount of hazardous waste and radioactive
waste generated by the undertaking’, shall only be disclosed if such information is
assessed to be material and may be omitted if not (ESRS 1 paragraph 34).
Accordingly, it depends on materiality whether radioactive waste from analytical devices and
tracer applications shall be reported. See also ESRS 1 paragraphs 36 and 42 on establishing
appropriate thresholds when disclosing metrics.
It is noted that the datapoints of ESRS E5 paragraph 39 derive from other EU legislation as listed
in Appendix B of ESRS 2 and that ESRS 2 paragraph 56 applies. This means that, if applicable (i.e.
the amount of radioactive waste is not material for reporting purposes), the undertaking shall
flag that the amount of radioactive waste that is not material in accordance with ESRS 1
paragraph 35.
See also Question ID 952 –Metrics – rounding and decimals; materiality of information.
Question ID 461 - Sustainability statement – ESRS 1 flowchart E and
disclosure of transition plans
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Why in the Flowchart in Appendix E of ESRS 1 are transition plans mentioned together with
policies, actions and targets?
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 paragraphs 62 and 72; and Appendix E: Flowchart for determining disclosures under ESRS;
ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-1: Disclosure Requirements related to climate change
transition plan
(Note: the disclosure of the transition plan related to biodiversity is voluntary (ESRS E4 Disclosure
Requirement E4-1); as such it is not in the scope of this explanation).
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 35 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Key terms
Disclosure of transition plans, minimum disclosure requirements, ESRS 1 Appendix E
Background
The question received: ‘What is the logic according to Flowchart E of ESRS 1 for determining
Disclosure Requirements for transition plans and processes?’ has been reworded to the above to
be clearer.
ESRS 1 Appendix E – Flowchart for determining disclosures under ESRS presents the reasoning to
determine disclosures when a topic covered by a topical standard is material. In such case, the
related policies, actions and targets shall be disclosed, or it shall be stated that the undertaking
does not have policies, actions and/or targets related to the material sustainability matter. The
undertaking may report a timeframe in which it aims to have these in place (ESRS 1 paragraph 33).
ESRS 1 Appendix E – Flowchart for determining disclosures under ESRS states: ‘… Disclosure
Requirements in relation to action plans, targets, policies, scenario analysis and transition plans
are proportionate because they are contingent on the undertaking having these, …’
ESRS 1 Appendix E – Flowchart for determining disclosures under ESRS does not include
information on the Disclosure Requirements related to transitions plans (E1-1 and E4-1). It does
not include, either, information on the Disclosure Requirements related to the processes in the
ESRS S1 to S4: Processes for engaging with stakeholders about impacts (S1-2, S2-2, S3-2 and S4-2)
and processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for stakeholders to raise concerns (S1-
3, S2-3, S3-3 and S4-3).
ESRS E1-1 paragraph 17 states: ‘In case the undertaking does not have a transition plan in place,
it shall indicate whether and, if so, when it will adopt a transition plan.’
The Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms defines ‘Actions’ as: ‘Actions refer to (i) actions and
action plans (including transition plans) that are undertaken to ensure that the undertaking
delivers against targets set and through which the undertaking seeks to address material impacts,
risks and opportunities; and (ii) decisions to support these with financial, human or technological
resources.’
The Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms defines ‘Transition plan’ as: ‘A specific type of action
plan that is adopted by the undertaking in relation to a strategic decision and that addresses:
(a) a public policy objective; and/or
(b) an entity-specific action plan organised as a structured set of targets and actions,
associated with a key strategic decision, a major change in business model, and/or
particularly important actions and allocated resources.’
Answer
The flowchart in Appendix E of ESRS 1 provides an illustration of the provisions in ESRS on
materiality.
The Flowchart refers to actions (as well as policies and targets) which by definition also comprises
transition plans.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 36 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Transition plans are an area of disclosure that have characteristics in common with policies,
targets, and actions. Climate transition plans for example are effectively action plans to achieve
the targets for carbon emissions.
Question ID 526 and ID 1021 – Disclosure of a non-material
datapoint (water-consumption in own operations) related to a (a)
material and (b) non-material topic
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
(1) If water consumption is only deemed material for the value chain (and not material to own
operations), is the undertaking still allowed to include this datapoint in its sustainability
statement?
(2) If water consumption is not material for the undertaking (neither in relation to IROs that
arise in own operations nor for those that arise in upstream and downstream value chain)
but third parties ask the undertaking to include this datapoint in its sustainability
statement, is this allowed?
ESRS Reference
ESRS E3 Disclosure Requirement E3-4 (paragraph 28); ESRS 1 paragraphs 11, 31, 33, 34, 114 and
QC 17
Key terms
Water consumption; non-material; non-material datapoint
Background
EFRAG received two questions that were combined because they are on a similar issue. ID 526 ‘If
water consumption is only deemed material for upstream value chain (and not material to own
operations), is the undertaking still allowed to include this datapoint in their report?’ and ID 1021
‘For a non-material topic, is it allowed to publish metrics that some clients / scoring agencies ask
us to include in our sustainability reporting?’
ESRS E3 paragraph 28 states: ‘The disclosure required by paragraph 26 relates to own operations
and shall include: (a) total water consumption in m3 ….’.
ESRS 1 paragraph 31: states: ‘The applicable information prescribed within a Disclosure
Requirement, including its datapoints, or an entity-specific disclosure shall be disclosed when the
undertaking assesses, as part of its assessment of material information, that the information is
relevant from one or more of the following perspectives:
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 37 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(a) the significance of the information in relation to the matter it purports to depict or
explain; or
(b) the capacity of such information to meet the users’ decision-making needs, including the
needs of primary users of general-purpose financial reporting described in paragraph 48
and/or the needs of users whose principal interest is in information about the
undertaking’s impacts.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 11 states: ‘In addition to the disclosure requirements laid down in the three
categories of ESRS, when an undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not
covered or not covered with sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific
facts and circumstances, it shall provide additional entity-specific disclosures to enable users to
understand the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities. Application
requirements AR 1 to AR 5 provide further guidance regarding entity-specific disclosures.
ESRS 1 paragraph 33 states for policies, actions and targets: ‘When disclosing information on
policies, actions and targets in relation to a sustainability matter that has been assessed to be
material, the undertaking shall include the information prescribed by all the Disclosure
Requirements and datapoints in the topical and sector-specific ESRS related to that matter and in
the corresponding Minimum Disclosure Requirement on policies, actions, and targets required
under ESRS 2. If the undertaking cannot disclose the information prescribed by either the
Disclosure Requirements and datapoints in the topical or sector-specific ESRS, or the Minimum
Disclosure Requirements in ESRS 2 on policies, actions and targets, because it has not adopted the
respective policies, implemented the respective actions or set the respective targets, it shall
disclose this to be the case and it may report a timeframe in which it aims to have these in place.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 34 states regarding metrics: ‘When disclosing information on metrics for a
material sustainability matter according to the Metrics and Targets section of the relevant topical
ESRS, the undertaking:
(a) shall include the information prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement if it assesses such
information to be material; and
(b) may omit the information prescribed by a datapoint of a Disclosure Requirement if it
assesses such information to be not material and concludes that such information is not
needed to meet the objective of the Disclosure Requirement.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 114 states: ‘When the undertaking includes in its sustainability statement
additional disclosures stemming from (i) other legislation which requires the undertaking to
disclose sustainability information, or (ii) generally accepted sustainability reporting standards
and frameworks, including non-mandatory guidance and sector-specific guidance, published by
other standard-setting bodies (such as technical material issued by the International Sustainability
Standards Board or the Global Reporting Initiative), such disclosures shall:
(a) be clearly identified with an appropriate reference to the related legislation, standard or
framework (see ESRS 2 BP-2, paragraph 15);
(b) meet the requirements for qualitative characteristics of information specified in
Chapter 2 and Appendix B of this Standard.’
ESRS 1 paragraph QC 17 states regarding the qualitative characteristic of ‘understandability’:
‘Concise disclosures shall only include material information. Complementary information
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 38 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
presented pursuant to paragraph 114 shall be provided in a way that avoids obscuring material
information.’
Answer
(1) If water consumption is only deemed material for the value chain (and not material to
own operations), is the undertaking still allowed to include this datapoint in its
sustainability statement?
If water consumption is only deemed material in relation to impacts, risks or opportunities that
arise in the upstream or downstream value chain and not in own operations, the most relevant
metric to be included is the water consumption for the value chain only. This is not a metric
explicitly included in the sector-agnostic ESRS (ESRS E3 paragraph 24 (a) being focused on own
operations). However, even if no datapoint in ESRS E3 is identified as material, the undertaking
shall consider whether this or another metric that depicts this matter shall be disclosed as entity-
specific disclosure following ESRS 1 paragraph 11. See also Question ID 442 – Entity-specific
metrics.
As stated in ESRS 1 paragraph 34 (b) in respect of metrics for a material sustainability matter, an
undertaking ‘may omit the information prescribed by a datapoint of a Disclosure Requirement if
it assesses such information to be not relevant based on the ESRS 1 paragraph 31 criteria and
concludes that such information is not needed to meet the objective of the Disclosure
Requirement.’
The undertaking assesses the datapoint of ESRS E3 paragraph 24 (a) to be not material
information. Accordingly, based on ESRS 1 paragraph 34 (b) the undertaking may omit this
datapoint even though the sustainability matter of water consumption is material (because it
relates to material impacts, risks or opportunities in the value chain).
As ESRS 1 paragraph 34 (b) states that ‘the undertaking may omit’, this implies that the
undertaking does not have to omit the datapoint. Put differently, ‘may omit’ does not mean ‘shall
omit’. Therefore, it can be included in the sustainability statement.
In addition, the undertaking shall consider requirements of ESRS 1 in Chapter 2 Qualitative
characteristics of information whereby material information is not obscured by immaterial
information.
(2) If water consumption is not material for the undertaking (neither in relation to IROs
that arise in own operations nor for those that arise in upstream and downstream value
chain) but third parties ask the undertaking to include this datapoint in its sustainability
statement, is this allowed?
It depends. Following the provisions in ESRS 1 paragraph 114, in addition to the disclosure of
material matters identified during the materiality assessment process, the undertaking may
provide additional information stemming from other legislation as well as from generally
accepted sustainability reporting standards and frameworks (for example, SASB Standards or GRI
Standards). Other voluntary additional disclosures require the application of professional
judgement, are expected to be limited (i.e. disclosure is based on robust reasoning) and shall fulfil
the criteria laid out in ESRS 1 Appendix B Qualitative characteristics of information. This requires
that: ‘Complementary information … be provided in a way that avoids obscuring material
information.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 39 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Such information may fall under the remit of ESRS 2 BP-2 paragraph 15 whereby this information
‘shall: (a) be clearly identified with an appropriate reference to the related legislation, standard
or framework (see ESRS 2 BP-2, paragraph 15) …’.
Question ID 753– Financial materiality in the value chain and power
purchase agreements
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
(1) Shall a matter included in the financial statements of the undertaking that is outside of
its value chain be reported in the undertaking’s financial materiality assessment?
(2) There is uncertainty as to whether a PPA (Power Purchase Agreement) would enter the
scope of the value chain of the undertaking, and more specifically, (i) in the case of a VPPA
and (ii) in the case of a DPPA.
ESRS Reference
ESRS 1 Chapter 3.5 Financial materiality, paragraphs 49 and 63
Key terms
Value chain; financial materiality; power purchase agreements
Background
As part of the question, the submitter also stated: ‘While Section 3.5 Financial materiality does
not mention that the matter shall be part of the undertaking’s value chain, the related notions of
risks and opportunities are used in the rest of the document as “in the undertaking’s value chain”.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 49 states: ‘A sustainability matter is material from a financial perspective if it
triggers or could reasonably be expected to trigger material financial effects on the undertaking.
This is the case when a sustainability matter generates risks or opportunities that have a material
influence or could reasonably be expected to have a material influence, on the undertaking’s
development, financial position, financial performance, cash flows, access to finance or cost of
capital over the short-, medium- or long-term. Risks and opportunities may derive from past
events or future events. The financial materiality of a sustainability matter is not constrained to
matters that are within the control of the undertaking but includes information on material risks
and opportunities attributable to business relationships beyond the scope of consolidation used
in the preparation of financial statements.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 63 states: ‘The information about the reporting undertaking provided in the
sustainability statement shall be extended to include information on the material impacts, risks
and opportunities connected with the undertaking through its direct and indirect business
relationships in the upstream and/or downstream value chain (“value chain information”).’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 40 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
A power purchase agreement (PPA), or electricity power agreement, is a long-term contract
between an electricity generator and a customer, usually a utility, government or company. The
PPA defines the conditions of the agreement such as the amount of electricity to be supplied,
negotiated prices, accounting and penalties for non-compliance. Since it is a bilateral agreement,
a PPA can take many forms and is usually tailored to specific applications. The power generated
might be renewable. Under a PPA, the customer is strictly speaking paying a provider for the
energy received. Therefore, in the case of renewable energy the undertaking will not necessarily
get the ancillary benefits of owning the renewable energy asset, such as the ability to get tax
rebates or sell renewable energy credits.
PPAs might be in the form of a physical-PPA (where the customer receives a fixed amount of
energy at a fixed price) or a virtual-PPA (where the customer receives/pays cash for a fixed
amount of energy based on the difference between a fixed and a variable price per unit).
Often those contracts result in parties involved receiving renewable energy certificates (‘RECs’).
Answer
(1) Shall a matter included in the financial statements of the undertaking that is outside of
its value chain be reported in the undertaking's financial materiality assessment?
A transaction or contract included in the financial statements and the sustainability matter related
to it cannot be considered outside the value chain. Therefore, a PPA, be it physical or virtual, is
considered as being in own operations (noting that value chain comprises upstream and
downstream value chain as well as own operations; see Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms).
Financial materiality in the sustainability statement includes items that arise from the
undertaking’s own operations and items that arise in its value chain.
A matter is material for inclusion in the sustainability statement from a financial materiality
perspective when it generates risks or opportunities that have a material influence or could
reasonably be expected to have a material influence on the undertaking’s development, financial
position, financial performance, cash flows, access to finance or cost of capital over the short-,
medium- or long-term (see ESRS 1 paragraph 49).
(2) There is uncertainty as to whether a PPA (Power Purchase Agreement) would enter the
scope of the value chain of the undertaking, and more specifically, 1) in the case of a
VPPA and (2) in the case of a DPPA.
A counterparty to the power purchase agreement is connected with the undertaking’s activities
(see ESRS 1 paragraph 63).
A physical-PPA results in the delivery of energy, and as it relates to indirect emissions from the
perspective of the purchaser of energy, falling under Scope 2 emissions under the GHG Protocol.
A virtual-PPA is a financial instrument resulting in the exchange of cash often combined with
certificates received by the reporting undertaking to affect the energy mix of the undertaking. As
this is part of the undertaking’s activities (to manage its energy costs or to obtain Guarantees of
Origin (or Energy Attribute Certificates (EAC)), this is part of its own operations and not its value
chain. The purchased Guarantees of Origin may ultimately affect the categorisation of Scope 2
disclosures under ESRS E1, whether surrendered or not. Please note that aforementioned does
relate only to the virtual PPA relationship and not to the one between the undertaking and the
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 41 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
party delivering physical energy, which often exists in the three-party relationship involving
virtual-PPAs.
As the substance of the contracts differ between physical and virtual PPAs, the undertaking’s
material impacts on people and environment and the material effects of sustainability matters on
the undertaking’s development, performance and condition might also differ.
See also Implementation Guidance EFRAG IG 2 Value Chain FAQ 2: Are financial assets (loans,
equity and debt investments) considered business relationships that trigger VC information?
states: ‘Business relationships and value chain as defined in Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of
Terms do not exclude any types of activities and business relationships.’
Question ID 821 – Risk and opportunity for financial materiality
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Regarding financial materiality, there are matters that trigger exposure to risks or opportunities
only and others that trigger the exposure to both. In the case of a matter that triggers exposure
to both risks and opportunities, should the assessment of materiality be made on each
individually or is it on the combined financial risk and opportunity?
In addition to the question asked, the submitter provided the following background to the
question: ‘For example, if we take energy as a topic, energy consumption is a financial risk
because the cost of energy can fluctuate significantly. But there is also an opportunity in terms of
reduced energy costs if the company invests in renewable energy and energy-efficient appliances.
In this case, should the financial risk be assessed separately from the financial opportunity? Or
should there be some assessment of what would weigh stronger in the balance, risk or
opportunity and assess accordingly?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 3.5 Financial materiality paragraphs 49 to 51 and AR 14 to 15
Key terms
Financial materiality; sustainability matters generating sustainability risks or opportunities
Background
ESRS 1 paragraphs 49 to 51 state:
‘49. A sustainability matter is material from a financial perspective if it triggers or could
reasonably be expected to trigger material financial effects on the undertaking. This is the
case when a sustainability matter generates risks or opportunities that have a material
influence or that could reasonably be expected to have a material influence on the
undertaking’s development, financial position, financial performance, cash flows, access to
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 42 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
finance or cost of capital over the short-, medium- or long-term. Risks and opportunities
may derive from past events or future events. The financial materiality of a sustainability
matter is not constrained to matters that are within the control of the undertaking but
includes information on material risks and opportunities attributable to business
relationships beyond the scope of consolidation used in the preparation of financial
statements.
50. Dependencies on natural, human and social resources can be sources of financial risks or
opportunities. Dependencies may trigger effects in two possible ways:
(a) they may influence the undertaking’s ability to continue to use or obtain the
resources needed in its business processes as well as the quality and pricing of those
resources; and
(b) they may affect the undertaking’s ability to rely on relationships needed in its
business processes on acceptable terms.
51. The materiality of risks and opportunities is assessed based on a combination of the
likelihood of occurrence and the potential magnitude of the financial effects.’
Regarding sustainability-related risks or opportunities, ESRS 1 paragraph AR 14 states: ‘The
identification of risks and opportunities that affect or could reasonably be expected to affect the
undertaking’s financial position, financial performance, cash flows, access to finance or cost of
capital over the short-, medium- or long-term is the starting point for financial materiality
assessment. In this context, the undertaking shall consider: …
(b) their classification as sources of:
i. risks (contributing to negative deviation in future expected cash inflows or increase in
deviation in future expected cash outflows and/or negative deviation from an
expected change in capitals not recognised in the financial statements); or
ii. opportunities (contributing to positive deviation in future expected cash inflows or
decrease in deviation in future cash outflows and/or positive deviation from expected
change in capitals not recognised in financial statements).’
ESRS 1 paragraph AR 15 states: ‘Once the undertaking has identified its risks and opportunities, it
shall determine which of them are material for reporting. This shall be based on a combination of
(i) the likelihood of occurrence and (ii) the potential magnitude of financial effects determined on
the basis of appropriate thresholds. In this step it shall consider the contribution of those risks
and opportunities to financial effects in the short-, medium- and long-term based on:
(a) scenarios /forecasts that are deemed likely to materialise; and
(b) potential financial effects related to sustainability matters deriving either from situations
with a below the “more likely than not” threshold or assets/liabilities not, or not yet,
reflected in financial statements. This includes:
i. potential situations that following the occurrence of future events may affect cash
flow generation potential;
ii. capitals that are not recognised as assets from an accounting and financial
reporting perspective but have a significant influence on financial performance,
such as natural, intellectual (organisational), human, social and relationship
capitals; and
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 43 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
iii. possible future events that may have an influence on the evolution of such
capitals.’
Answer
When the nature of an opportunity or a risk relating to a sustainability matter is different, it shall
be assessed separately.
In the example provided, the submitter states that energy consumption is a source of (financial)
risk because the cost of energy can fluctuate significantly (upside and downside price risk).
However, he has also identified an investment opportunity in terms of reduced energy costs in
the case that the company invests in renewable energy and energy-efficient appliances.
In financial terms, an undertaking that is more exposed to a risk (higher prices for supplies, lower
prices for sold products) than expected is also exposed to positive deviations when prices for
supplies /sold products will be below /above expectations. The positive deviations are not
necessarily identified as separate opportunities but assessed together with the risk. In the
example above, it is the action of investing in renewable energy that creates the opportunity to
reduce energy expenses.
Supporting material
IFRS S1 General Requirements for Disclosure of Sustainability-related Financial Information also
stresses regarding (financial) materiality in paragraph B15 the importance of expectations in the
materiality assessment: ‘The decisions described in paragraph B14 [i.e. decisions of primary users
related to providing resources to the entity] depend on primary users’ expectations about
returns, for example, dividends, principal and interest payments or market price increases. Those
expectations depend on primary users’ assessment of the amount, timing and uncertainty of
future net cash inflows to the entity and on their assessment of the stewardship of the entity’s
economic resources by the entity’s management and its governing body/bodies or individual(s).’
Question ID 952 – Metrics – rounding and decimals; materiality of
information
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
To how many decimals should a percentage be rounded? And for other datapoints that ask for a
‘decimal’, how many decimals are expected?
ESRS Reference
All numerical datapoints required by ESRS
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 44 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Key terms
Decimals, rounding; metrics, rounding; materiality of information
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 34 states: ‘When disclosing information on metrics for a material sustainability
matter according to the Metrics and Targets section of the relevant topical ESRS, the undertaking:
(a) shall include the information prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement if it assesses such
information to be material; and
(b) may omit the information prescribed by a datapoint of a Disclosure Requirement if it
assesses such information to be not material and concludes that such information is not
needed to meet the objective of the Disclosure Requirement.’
Answer
ESRS does not have specific rules for rounding or prescribing the number of decimals to be used
for percentages.
ESRS 1 paragraph 34 clarifies how that materiality of information applies to metrics. Accordingly,
the materiality of information also applies to rounding and decimals to be used for a percentage
metric. The undertaking may omit decimals and use rounding if it considers the information not
conveyed through omitting decimals and using rounding to be not material.
Materiality of information needs to be decided on a case-by-case basis depending on fact patterns
such as the size of the company, the metric to be disclosed and the materiality of the topic.
Question ID 1019 – Sustainability matter expected to become
material in the future
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
(1) Consider an undertaking that has a business plan approved for a three-year duration. The
undertaking expects a given impact or risk to arise in four to five years and be material
then. Shall the matter be considered material for the reporting period?
(2) Consider a matter that is not assessed to be material over the short-, medium- or long-
term horizon as of the reporting date, but – if assessed in four to five years – it might
become material in the future. Should the undertaking consider this topic as not-material
or as material?
ESRS Reference
ESRS 1 paragraphs 43 and 49
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 45 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Key terms
Sustainability matter only material in the future
Background
The question received by the submitter: ‘Our judgment is that one topic is not material for our
enterprise, but that it will most probably become material within four to five years. Should we
state the topic as non-material or as material (the business plan approved by the shareholders
and sent to banks is for a three-year duration)?’ was split into two questions and rephrased to
the above question to better separate the issues asked. The submitter gave the following
background information to the question: ‘Water consumption will most probably become a
material topic in Southern Europe for many preparers within five to ten years …’.
ESRS 1 paragraph 43 states:’ A sustainability matter is material from an impact perspective when
it pertains to the undertaking’s material actual or potential, positive or negative impacts on
people or the environment over the short-, medium- or long-term.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 49 states: ‘A sustainability matter is material from a financial perspective if it
triggers or could reasonably be expected to trigger material financial effects on the undertaking.
This is the case when a sustainability matter generates risks or opportunities that have a material
influence, or could reasonably be expected to have a material influence, on the undertaking’s
development, financial position, financial performance, cash flows, access to finance or cost of
capital over the short-, medium- or long-term.’
Answer
(1) Consider an undertaking that has a business plan approved by for a three-year duration.
The undertaking expects a given impact or risk to arise in four to five years and be material
then. Shall the matter be considered material for the reporting period?
Yes, the materiality assessment is not limited to a business plan time-horizon.
The submitter clarifies that the topic in question relates to water consumption that will most
probably become a material topic in Southern Europe for many preparers within five to ten years,
which is a time horizon longer than the one used in the approved business plan.
The key question for the assessment of materiality from a financial point of view is whether water
consumption generates for the undertaking risks or opportunities that have a material influence
or that could reasonably be expected to have a material influence on the undertaking’s
development, financial position, financial performance, cash flows, access to finance or cost of
capital over the short-, medium- or long-term (ESRS 1 paragraph 49). This is not limited to material
influence within the time horizon of the last approved business plan of the undertaking.
See also Question ID 1039 – Time horizon – only long-term material.
(2) Consider a matter that is not assessed to be material over the short-, medium- or long-
term horizon as of the reporting date, but – if assessed in four to five years – it might
become material in the future. Should the undertaking consider this topic as not-material
or as material?
The matter is not material as of the reporting date.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 46 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
As stated in Implementation Guidance 1 – Materiality assessment FAQ 7 How frequently should
an undertaking update its sustainability materiality, ‘the materiality assessment is a dynamic
process subject to the inherent evolution of the undertaking and needs to be considered for an
update on an ongoing basis.’ Acknowledging such a dynamic process, it is possible that a matter
assessed today be considered material neither from an impact nor from a financial perspective,
but this assessment may change sometime in the future. This may happen if assumptions that
have been used in the impact and financial materiality assessment today do not materialise as
expected.
Question ID 1039 – Time horizon – only long-term material
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
We are trying to understand how changing the materiality of a sustainability matter over the
three timeframes influences Disclosure Requirements e.g., whether the matter of water is
deemed not material for the short- and medium-term impact materiality but material in the long-
term. Does that mean the matter is deemed material and disclosure is required even though it
only becomes material in the long-term?
ESRS Reference
ESRS 1 paragraphs 43 and 49
Key terms
Time horizon
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 43 states:’ ‘A sustainability matter is material from an impact perspective when
it pertains to the undertaking’s material actual or potential, positive or negative impacts on
people or the environment over the short-, medium- or long-term. …’.
ESRS 1 paragraph 49 states: ‘A sustainability matter is material from a financial perspective if it
triggers or could reasonably be expected to trigger material financial effects on the undertaking.
This is the case when a sustainability matter generates risks or opportunities that have a material
influence or could reasonably be expected to have a material influence, on the undertaking’s
development, financial position, financial performance, cash flows, access to finance or cost of
capital over the short-, medium- or long-term. …’.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 47 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Answer
Yes. ESRS 1 paragraph 43 states for impact materiality, and paragraph 49 for financial materiality,
that: ‘A sustainability matter is material … when it pertains to / if it triggers … over the short-,
medium- or long-term.’ The time horizons are connected with an ‘or’, meaning that the impact /
financial materiality must not occur during all three-time horizons. It is sufficient that materiality
occurs during any of the time horizons.
If a matter is assessed as material in the long-term, the matter is considered material, and the
related Disclosure Requirements are applicable. Attention should be paid to the possible omission
of metrics when following paragraph 43 of ESRS 1.
See also Question ID 1019 – Sustainability matter expected to become material in the future.
Question ID 1048 – Disclosure of datapoint(s) related to a non-
material Disclosure Requirement for a metric
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
For a material matter, if the undertaking assesses that a Disclosure Requirement is not material,
is it possible to conclude that a datapoint of such Disclosure Requirement is material and therefore
included?
ESRS Reference
ESRS 1 paragraphs 16, 31 and 34
Key terms
Metrics; non-material Disclosure Requirement; datapoints
Background
The question received was ‘When doing the translation from the double materiality assessment’s
outcomes to Disclosure Requirements and datapoints (regarding a metric), is it possible that
datapoints are in scope when the related Disclosure Requirement is out of scope (non-material
Disclosure Requirement)?’ and was reworded for clarity.
The following background to the question was provided by the submitter: ‘After the double
materiality assessment, we translate the outcomes to which disclosure requirements are
applicable. Thereafter, we assess which datapoints are applicable. The question arises whether
specific datapoints within a disclosure requirement that is assessed to be out of scope could be in
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 48 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
scope. So, for example, ESRS S1-14 is out of scope, but one of the datapoints is in scope / the
company wants to report on it. Is that possible?’
ESRS 1 paragraph 16 states: ‘ESRS structure the information to be disclosed under Disclosure
Requirements. Each Disclosure Requirement consists of one or more distinct datapoints. The term
“datapoint” can also refer to a narrative sub-element of a Disclosure Requirement.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 31 states: ‘The applicable information prescribed within a Disclosure
Requirement, including its datapoints, or an entity-specific disclosure shall be disclosed when the
undertaking assesses, as part of its assessment of material information, that the information is
relevant from one or more of the following perspectives:
(a) the significance of the information in relation to the matter it purports to depict or
explain; or
(b) the capacity of such information to meet the users’ decision-making needs, including the
needs of primary users of general-purpose financial reporting described in paragraph 48
and/or the needs of users whose principal interest is in information about the
undertaking’s impacts.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 34 states: ‘When disclosing information on metrics for a material sustainability
matter according to the Metrics and Targets section of the relevant topical ESRS, the undertaking:
(a) shall include the information prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement if it assesses such
information to be material; and
(b) may omit the information prescribed by a datapoint of a Disclosure Requirement if it
assesses such information to be not material and concludes that such information is not
needed to meet the objective of the Disclosure Requirement.’
Answer
No, it is not possible for a datapoint(s) to be material and for the related Disclosure Requirement
not to be material when disclosing information on metrics.
ESRS structure the information to be disclosed under Disclosure Requirements, and each
Disclosure Requirement consists of one or more distinct datapoints (ESRS 1 paragraph 16). One
datapoint (or more) related to a Disclosure Requirement in a topical standard assessed as material
makes that Disclosure Requirement material. Conversely, if all datapoints of a topical Disclosure
Requirement are assessed as not material, the related topical Disclosure Requirement is not
material.
However, it may be possible to conclude that an individual datapoint (or datapoints) are not
material while the corresponding Disclosure Requirement is material. Therefore, it is possible for
the entity to conclude that not all datapoints need to be provided to fulfill the information
requirements for a specific Disclosure Requirement.
See also Question ID 526 and ID 1021 – Disclosure of a non-material datapoint (water-
consumption in own operations) related to a (a) material and (b) non-material topic; and ID 177 –
Mapping sustainability matters (ESRS 1 paragraph AR 16) with Disclosure Requirements.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 49 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question ID 1297 – Level of disaggregation
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
What is the level of disaggregation in the sustainability statement of a group with multiple legal
entities per country in the EU and outside EU?
ESRS Reference
ESRS 1 Chapter 3.7 Level of disaggregation, paragraphs 54, 55 and 102
Key terms
Level of disaggregation
Background
The following background was provided with the question asked: ‘The ESRS Chapter 3.7 explains
the case where an undertaking shall or shall not disaggregate the reported information (focusing
here on the datapoints). It explains the possibility of disaggregating by country or by site when
there are significant variations/impacts’. The following questions that were received relate to the
granularity/breakdown of the data to be reported by a Group headquartered in the EU with
several legal entities per country in the EU and outside the EU and possibly a legal entity in one
country which owns some sub-entities in the country or abroad:
(a) Is it mandatory for the group to report datapoints per legal entity, or is it only in the case
of variation / impact materially that a specific entity detail shall be reported?
(b) If the group reports only aggregated data at the group level, does it mean that a specific
legal entity (in the EU) will be able to share ‘only’ group datapoints and not the specific
information related to its legal entity?
ESRS 1 paragraphs 54 and 55 state:
‘54. When needed for a proper understanding of its material impacts, risks and opportunities, the
undertaking shall disaggregate the reported information:
(a) by country, when there are significant variations of material impacts, risks and
opportunities across countries and when presenting the information at a higher level of
aggregation would obscure material information about impacts, risks or opportunities;
or
(b) by significant site or by significant asset, when material impacts, risks and opportunities
are highly dependent on a specific location or asset.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 50 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
55. When defining the appropriate level of disaggregation for reporting, the undertaking shall
consider the disaggregation adopted in its materiality assessment. Depending on the
undertaking’s specific facts and circumstances, a disaggregation by subsidiary may be
necessary.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 102 states: ‘When the undertaking is reporting at a consolidated level, it shall
perform its assessment of material impacts, risks and opportunities for the entire consolidated
group regardless of its group legal structure. It shall ensure that all subsidiaries are covered in a
way that allows for the unbiased identification of material impacts, risks and opportunities.
Criteria and thresholds for assessing an impact, risk or opportunity as material shall be
determined based on Chapter 3 of this Standard.’
Answer
Determining the appropriate level of disaggregation involves judgement. The key driver is to
provide fair presentation in relation to the specific disclosure objective of a Disclosure
Requirement or datapoint.
Disaggregation depends on (a) variations of material impacts, risks and opportunities across
countries (e.g. across different sectors or business models) and (b) impacts, risks and
opportunities being highly dependent on a specific location (e.g. country) or asset as stipulated in
ESRS 1 paragraph 54.
ESRS 1 paragraph 56 further clarifies that, where data is aggregated, the undertaking shall ensure
that this aggregation does not obscure the specificity and context necessary to interpret the
information, nor should the undertaking aggregate material items that differ in nature.
Materiality as the basis for sustainability disclosures, including the level of disaggregation (see
ESRS 1 Chapter 3.7 Level of disaggregation), is agnostic to the group’s legal structure.
In conclusion, the undertaking is expected to report at a legal entity level if for specific matters or
material IROs this corresponds to the criteria in ESRS 1 paragraph 54 and 56 (e.g. one legal entity
per country and ‘significant variations of material impacts, risks and opportunities across
countries’ as well as higher-level aggregation would obscure information).
When needed for a proper understanding of its material impacts, risks and opportunities, the
undertaking shall disaggregate the reported information by significant site or by significant asset
when material impacts, risks and opportunities are highly dependent on a specific location or
asset in accordance with ESRS 1 paragraph 54(b).
Conversely, the undertaking is expected to report information aggregated at group level (or for a
cluster of legal entities) if it assesses that a more granular level of disaggregation is not necessary.
In this case, the legal entities/subsidiaries are treated the same irrespective of their location
(within the EU or in non-EU territories) when they are included as part of the aggregated data,
with their share contributing to the respective datapoint (e.g. with their share of Scope 2 GHG
emissions, consumed energy – whether purchased or acquired externally, i.e. from third
parties/non-group entities in accordance with ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6) or their
share of the group’s employee characteristics as required by ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-
6 – Characteristics of the undertaking’s employees.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 51 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS 1 chapter 5 Value chain
Reference to Implementation Guidance EFRAG IG 2 Value Chain
Implementation Guidance 2: Value Chain
Question ID 41 - Financial institutions – scope of reporting boundary
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
What is the scope of own operations for an insurance company under ESRS? Is it the same as
under Solvency II, i.e. do the ESRS standards relate only to insurers’ non-life insurance activities
(fire, health, damage to vehicles, third part liability, assistance, legal expenses etc.), or also to
investment activities? How should the sustainability report address Insurance with profit
participation?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraphs 62 and 63.
Key terms
Insurance companies, financial Institutions, own operations, investment activities, reporting
boundary
Background
Articles 19a (3) and 29a (3) of the Accounting Directive (Directive 2013/34/EU) require that
reported information relates to the undertaking’s own operations and its upstream and
downstream value chain.
ESRS do not define an undertaking’s ‘own operations.’
ESRS paragraph 62 states that: ‘The sustainability statement shall be for the same reporting
undertaking as the financial statements. For example, if the reporting undertaking is a parent
company required to prepare consolidated financial statements, the sustainability statement will
be for the group. This requirement does not apply where the reporting undertaking is not required
to draw-up financial statements or where the reporting undertaking is preparing consolidated
sustainability reporting pursuant to Article 48i of Directive 2013/34/EU.’
ESRS paragraph 63 states that: ‘The information about the reporting undertaking provided in
the sustainability statement shall be extended to include information on the material impacts,
risks and opportunities connected with the undertaking through its direct and indirect business
relationships in the upstream and/or downstream value chain (“value chain information”). In
extending the information about the reporting undertaking, the undertaking shall include
material impacts, risks and opportunities connected with its upstream and downstream value
chain:
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 52 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(a) following the outcome of its due diligence process and of its materiality assessment; and
(b) in accordance with any specific requirements related to the value chain in other ESRS.’
Answer
ESRS 1 paragraph 62 clarifies that the sustainability statement shall be prepared for the same
reporting undertaking as the financial statements. Therefore, the scope of own operations for an
insurance company is guided by the financial reporting requirements, which reflect the business
model, and is not necessarily the same as under Solvency II. See also IG 2 Value Chain chapter
2.3).
Following the definition of business relationship in Annex 2 of the ESRS Delegated Act, the
investments (including those related to insurances with profit participation) fall under the scope
of an undertaking’s business relationships. Therefore, investments are considered part of the
value chain and are subject to consideration in the materiality assessment of impacts, risks and
opportunities as established in ESRS 1 paragraph 63. Also refer to Implementation Guidance
EFRAG IG 2 Value Chain FAQ 2. When the undertaking has identified material impacts, risks or
opportunities that are connected to an investment business relationship, it must disclose them
(ESRS 1 chapter 5 Value chain).
Regarding investment activities, the sector-agnostic ESRS do not provide Disclosure Requirements
concerning specific metrics apart from GHG Scope 3. For GHG Scope 3, Category 15 (Investments)
is to be provided, if it is determined to be a significant category in accordance with ESRS E1
paragraphs 44 (c), AR 39 (a), AR 46 and AR 48.
EFRAG expects to add more guidance on these aspects in the forthcoming sector ESRS.
Question ID 148 - Scope of consolidation for non-EU and
unconsolidated subsidiaries
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Shall the (consolidated) sustainability statement of a parent company include all its subsidiaries
even if some of them:
(a) are located outside of the EU; and/or
(b) if some are not consolidated for financial statements purposes?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraph 62
Key terms
Non-EU subsidiaries, non-consolidated subsidiaries
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 53 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
The following question was received: ‘Does the (consolidated) sustainability statement of a parent
company have to include all its subsidiaries even if some of them are located outside of the EU
and/or if some are not (financially/legally) consolidated?’ and changed it to the above question
for clarity.
ESRS 1 paragraph 62 states: ‘The sustainability statement shall be for the same reporting
undertaking as the financial statements. For example, if the reporting undertaking is a parent
company required to prepare consolidated financial statements, the sustainability statement will
be for the group.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 90 states: ‘Data and assumptions used in preparing the sustainability statement
shall be consistent to the extent possible with the corresponding financial data and assumptions
used in the undertaking’s financial statements.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 102 states: ‘When the undertaking is reporting at a consolidated level, it shall
perform its assessment of material impacts, risks and opportunities for the entire consolidated
group regardless of its group legal structure.’
The scope of consolidation of financial statements for undertakings organised as a group is
determined by either IFRS or national accounting laws, considering the requirements of the
Accounting Directive (Directive 2013/34/EU, specifically Article 21). Exemptions from the
consolidation of subsidiaries in the financial statements are provided under Article 23 (9) and (10)
of the Accounting Directive.
In addition to these provisions in practise subsidiaries sometimes may not be included in the
financial consolidation, based on materiality considerations, even though the legal obligation to
consolidate them exists.
Answer
The starting point of the sustainability statement is the perimeter used for financial reporting.
The consolidated sustainability statement of a parent company must include all its subsidiaries in
line with the scope of consolidation in financial reporting, even if some of them are located
outside of the EU.
The undertaking performs its assessment of material impacts, risks and opportunities based on
the business model for the entire consolidated group. Subsidiaries that are immaterial for financial
statements and therefore are excluded from the consolidated perimeter when preparing financial
statements on an exceptional basis for practical considerations, or in line with national accounting
law, may still be material from a double materiality point of view. When this happens, they shall
be included in the reporting boundaries of the consolidated sustainability statement, despite
them being deemed immaterial for the consolidated financial statements.
See also IG 1 Materiality assessment FAQ 22: Is a multi-sector group required to include metrics
for the entire group or only data related to the material IRO?
Question ID 217 - Prudential consolidation
Release date
March 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 54 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question asked
Should an undertaking prepare its ESRS consolidated sustainability statement following the
requirements relating to prudential consolidation laid down in Part One, Title II, chapter 2 of the
Capital Requirements Regulation (EU) 575/2013?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraph 62
Key Terms
Prudential consolidation
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 62 states: ‘The sustainability statement shall be for the same reporting
undertaking as the financial statements. For example, if the reporting undertaking is a parent
company required to prepare consolidated financial statements, the sustainability statement will
be for the group.’
In its answer to ID 2013-310 for Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (CRR), the European Banking
Authority states the following:
‘Article 18 (1) of Regulation (EU) No. 575/2013 (CRR) requires institutions to carry out a full
consolidation of all institutions and financial institutions which are its subsidiaries for the
application of prudential requirements on a consolidated basis.
Undertakings, other than institutions and financial institutions which neither acquire holdings nor
pursue any of the activities listed in points 2 to 12 and point 15 of Annex I to Directive 2013/36/EU
(CRD), are excluded from the scope of prudential consolidation irrespective of whether or not
these undertakings are directly or indirectly held by the parent entity. As a result:
(a) Non-financial subsidiaries are excluded from the scope of prudential consolidation
regardless of whether these subsidiaries are fully held by a holding company. On the other
hand, the holding company is included for prudential consolidation purposes;
(b) Conversely, any holding company needs consolidating even when it holds no participation
in a financial subsidiary. However, all its participations are excluded for prudential
consolidation purposes.’
Answer
In accordance with ESRS 1 paragraph 62, sustainability statements shall be prepared for the
consolidated group; therefore, they shall not be grounded in a consolidation based on prudential
requirements. The reported information shall meet the qualitative characteristics of information
and the requirements in ESRS 1 paragraphs 54, 57 on level of disaggregation: on this basis, if
applicable and helpful to produce more understandable and relevant reporting, the undertaking
could disaggregate the reported disclosures between those related to the scope of financial
consolidation and those related to the scope of prudential consolidation. This is particularly
relevant if the undertaking uses the option to incorporate by reference information presented in
its Pillar 3 reports (ESRS 1 paragraphs 119/122).
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 55 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS 1 chapter 6 Time horizons
Question ID 180 - Time horizon: impact versus financial materiality
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
Is there a difference between the time horizon as defined in ESRS 1 for impact materiality and for
financial materiality?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 6.4 Definition of short-, medium- and long-term for reporting purposes
Key terms
Financial materiality; impact materiality; time horizon
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 77 states: ‘When preparing its sustainability statement, the undertaking shall
adopt the following time intervals as of the end of the reporting period:
(a) for the short-term time horizon: the period adopted by the undertaking as the reporting
period in its financial statements;
(b) for the medium-term time horizon: from the end of the short-term reporting period defined
in (a) up to five years; and
(c) for the long-term time horizon: more than five years.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 80 states: ‘There may be circumstances where the use of the medium- or long-
term time horizons defined in paragraph 77 results in non-relevant information, as the
undertaking uses a different definition for (i) its processes of identification and management of
material impacts, risks and opportunities or (ii) the definition of its actions and setting targets.
These circumstances may be due to industry-specific characteristics, such as cash flow and
business cycles, the expected duration of capital investments, the time horizons over which the
users of sustainability statements conduct their assessments or the planning horizons typically
used in the undertaking’s industry for decision-making. In these circumstances, the undertaking
may adopt a different definition of medium- and/or long-term time horizons (see ESRS 2 BP-2,
paragraph 9).’
ESRS 1 Basis of Conclusions paragraph 124 states: ‘The SRB discussed whether to prescribe
mandatory time horizons for short-, medium- and long-term for reporting purposes or whether
they should be entity-specific based on its business model, industry-characteristics, and its
planning horizon. Feedback from public consultation in that respect was ambiguous. Preparers
generally preferred an entity-specific approach to be able to use already existing data consistent
with their managerial processes, whereas users a more standardized approach for better
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 56 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
comparability across undertakings. Noticing that many of the forthcoming first-time sustainability
reporters need guidance, to increase comparability the SRB decided to prescribe conventional
time periods but to allow deviations from the medium- and long- term time horizons based on
entity-specific circumstances, acknowledging also that – depending on the sustainability matter
and sector concerned – other time horizons within the long-term horizon might be useful and
therefore prevail at topical level.’
Answer
Time horizons are defined in ESRS 1 chapter 6.4, setting fixed time horizons for the short-,
medium- and long-term with no distinction being made between impact and financial materiality.
However, ESRS 1 paragraph 80 acknowledges that there may be circumstances in which the
undertaking uses a different definition of its time horizons compared to the fixed time horizons
set in ESRS 1 paragraph 77. This exception to the general rule has been granted to take into
account entity-specific circumstances to manage sustainability-related impacts, risks and
opportunities.
When applying either the predefined time horizons or when the exception is used and as a result
another entity-specific time horizon is used instead of the predefined time horizon, potential or
actual impacts may have a different time horizon than risks or opportunities arising from the same
sustainability matter (and their related financial effects). Similarly, actions put in place to address
impacts may have a different time horizon than actions put in place to address risks or
opportunities. Transparency about time horizons is required in connection with impacts and
anticipated financial effects, as stated in ESRS 2 SBM-3 paragraph 48 (c) and (e).
Question ID 286 - Financial year different from calendar year
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Is it possible to report some metrics on a (deviating) financial year and other metrics on a calendar
year basis? For example, if the financial year is from 1 July to 30 June, can the reporting of the
energy consumption in metrics be based on the energy bill on a calendar year basis (i.e. from 1
January to 31 December) rather than the financial year?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapters 2; 1 chapter 6.1; and 7.2; ESRS 2 BP-2 – Disclosures in relation to specific
circumstances (paragraphs 6 and 8)
Key terms
Financial year, calendar year, metrics
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 57 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 73 states: ‘The reporting period for the undertaking’s sustainability statement
shall be consistent with that of its financial statements.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 90 states: ‘Data and assumptions used in preparing the sustainability statement
shall be consistent to the extent possible with the corresponding financial data and assumptions
used in the undertaking’s financial statements.’
When making estimates, the qualitative characteristics of information shall be considered (see
ESRS 1 chapter 2 and Appendix B). Faithful representation requires information to be (i) complete,
(ii) neutral and (iii) accurate. Information can be accurate without being perfectly precise in all
respects. Accurate information implies that the undertaking has implemented adequate
processes and internal controls to avoid material errors or material misstatements. As such,
estimates shall be presented with a clear emphasis on their possible limitations and associated
uncertainty.
ESRS 1 paragraph 88 states: ‘An undertaking shall disclose information to enable users to
understand the most significant uncertainties affecting the quantitative metrics and monetary
amounts reported in its sustainability statement.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 69 states: ‘There are circumstances where the undertaking cannot collect the
information about its upstream and downstream value chain as required by paragraph 63 after
making reasonable efforts to do so. In these circumstances, the undertaking shall estimate the
information to be reported about its upstream and downstream value chain by using all
reasonable and supportable information, such as sector-average data and other proxies.’
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 42 states with respect to Disclosure Requirements E1-6 - Gross Scopes 1, 2,
3, and Total GHG emissions: ‘An undertaking might have a different reporting period from some
or all of the entities in its value chain. In such circumstances, the undertaking is permitted to
measure its GHG emissions in accordance with paragraph 44 using information for reporting
periods that are different from its own reporting period if that information is obtained from
entities in its value chain with reporting periods that are different from the undertaking’s
reporting period, on the condition that:
(a) the undertaking uses the most recent data available from those entities in its value chain
to measure and disclose its greenhouse gas emissions;
(b) the length of the reporting periods is the same; and
(c) the undertaking discloses the effects of significant events and changes in circumstances
(relevant to its GHG emissions) that occur between the reporting dates of the entities in
its value chain and the date of the undertaking’s general purpose financial statements.’
Answer
No, it is not possible to report metrics for a period which deviates from the financial year.
The reporting period for the undertaking’s sustainability statement shall be consistent with that
of its financial statements. Accordingly, the undertaking shall use consistent assumptions adopted
in the preparation of the financial statements for all metrics.
When reporting for a financial year from 1 July to 30 June, an undertaking starting for example
from the calendar year energy bill as a basis to calculate the energy consumption, shall make
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 58 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
appropriate adjustments to the data when this is necessary to properly depict the effective usage
during the period running from 1 July to 30 June.
There are special provisions for ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6 dealing with situations
where an undertaking has a different reporting period from some or all of the entities in its value
chain.
Question ID 1054 – Short-term time horizon
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Could you please specify the short-term time horizon?
ESRS Reference
ESRS 1 paragraph 77 (a)
Key terms
Time horizon
Background
The following background to the question was provided by the submitter: ‘Since the short-term
time horizon is defined as “the period adopted by the undertaking as the reporting period in its
financial statements”, the question is whether short-term refers to the reporting period itself or
the year after the reporting period, and the reference does only clarify the length of the period. ‘
ESRS 1 paragraph 77 states: ‘When preparing its sustainability statement, the undertaking shall
adopt the following time intervals as of the end of the reporting period:
(a) for the short-term horizon: the period adopted by the undertaking as the reporting period
in its financial statements …’.
Answer
The short-term time horizon normally lasts one year, from the end of the reporting period.
The length of the short-term time horizon is defined as the period adopted by the undertaking in
its financial statement as the reporting period; this period extends from the end of the reporting
period into the future (ESRS 1 paragraph 77 (a)).
The reporting period adopted by the undertaking in its financial statements is in nearly all cases
one year (and in rare cases longer if the operating cycle is longer than one year (e.g. might be the
case for producers of whisky or cigars based on the definition of operating cycle in IFRS (IAS 1)).
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 59 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
This short-term period lasts one year, from the end of the reporting period (also often called
balance-sheet date), as stated in ESRS 1 paragraph 77 (‘… as of the end of the reporting period
…’).
ESRS 1 chapter 7 preparation and presentation of sustainability information
Question ID 552 – Comparative information
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Does the company need to report data from previous years?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapters 7.1, 10.3 and 6.3
Key terms
Comparative information; base year
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 83 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose comparative information in respect
of the previous period for all quantitative metrics and monetary amounts disclosed in the current
period. When relevant to an understanding of the current period’s sustainability statement, the
undertaking shall also disclose comparative information for narrative disclosures.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 85 states: ‘Sometimes it is impracticable to adjust comparative information for
one or more prior periods to achieve comparability with the current period. For example, data
might not have been collected in the prior period(s) in a way that allows for either retrospective
application of a new definition of a metric or target or retrospective restatement to correct a prior
period error and it may be impracticable to recreate the information (see ESRS 2 BP-2). When it
is impracticable to adjust comparative information for one or more prior periods, the undertaking
shall disclose this fact.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 86 states: ‘When an ESRS requires the undertaking to present more than one
comparative period for a metric or datapoint, the requirements of that ESRS shall prevail.’
Some requirements (i.e., targets) provide the disclosure of the base year (see chapter 6.3 of
ESRS 1), defined as the historical reference date or period for which information is available and
against which subsequent information can be compared over time. In this context, comparative
information is required in respect of the base year for amounts reported in the current period
when reporting the developments and progress towards a target unless the relevant Disclosure
Requirement already defines how to report on progress.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 60 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS 1 paragraph 136 states: ‘To ease the first-time application of this Standard, the undertaking
is not required to disclose the comparative information required by section 7.1 Presenting
comparative information in the first year of preparation of the sustainability statement under the
ESRS.’
Answer
Yes, the undertaking shall always report comparative information in respect of the previous
period for all quantitative metrics and monetary amounts disclosed in the current period.
Narrative disclosures shall only be disclosed for previous periods when relevant to an
understanding of the current period’s sustainability statement.
Special provisions apply when it is impracticable to disclose comparative information (ESRS 1
paragraph 85).
Some requirements (e.g., targets) request the disclosure of the base year when reporting on
progress towards a target. Comparative information is required in respect of the base year for
amounts reported in the current period when reporting the developments and progress towards
a target (ESRS 1 chapter 6.3).
A phase-in provision exists exempting undertakings for the first year of preparation of the
sustainability statement to provide comparative information (ESRS 1 paragraph 136).
ESRS 1 chapter 8 Structure of sustainability statement
Question ID 38 - Structure of the sustainability statement
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Separating HR policies (ESRS S1-1), action plans (ESRS S1-4), targets (ESRS S1-5) and metrics (ESRS
S1-9 to S1-17) is not efficient for the understanding of users. Can we put into one chapter, for each
material issue (e.g., health and safety), the policy with the targets, the action plan, and the
metrics?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1 paragraph 11, ESRS 1 chapter 8, ESRS 1 Appendix F
Key Terms
Structure of the sustainability statement
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 61 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
ESRS 1 chapter 8 provides the basis for the presentation of information about sustainability
matters prepared in compliance with Articles 19a and 29a of Directive 2013/34/EU (i.e., the
sustainability statement) within the undertaking’s management report.
ESRS 2 paragraph 49 states: ‘The undertaking may disclose the descriptive information required
in paragraph 46 – ESRS 2 SBM-3 – alongside the disclosures provided under the corresponding
topical ESRS, in which case it shall still present a statement of its material impacts, risks and
opportunities alongside its disclosures prepared under this chapter of ESRS 2.’
ESRS S1 paragraph 11 specifies that the ESRS 2 General disclosures in topical standards shall be
presented alongside the disclosures required by ESRS 2 except for ESRS 2 SBM-3 Material impacts,
risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and business model, for which the
undertaking has an option to present the disclosures alongside the topical disclosures.
Answer
In relation to the presentation of information required by a topical standard, flexibility is provided
to the undertaking as there are no specific requirements defining how an undertaking shall
present the reported information related to a specific topic required by a given topical standard.
Therefore, for a given material matter (for example, health and safety) the undertaking may
present the applicable disclosures on policies, actions, targets and metrics all together and does
not have to follow the structure of the disclosure requirements within the topical standard, such
as ESRS S1 Own workforce.
Regarding the overall sustainability reporting, ESRS 1 paragraph 115 clarifies that the sustainability
statement must be structured in four parts: ‘general information, environmental information,
social information and governance information’. A particular treatment is anticipated for ESRS 2
SBM-3 related disclosures1 required by topical standards, which can be either presented alongside
the other ESRS 2 General disclosures or alongside the respective topical disclosures
(environmental, social and governance). In case the ESRS 2 General disclosures required by topical
standards are presented alongside other topical disclosures, the undertaking still has to present a
statement of its material impacts, risks and opportunities alongside its disclosures prepared under
ESRS 2 SBM-3. Appendix F of ESRS 1 provides a non-binding structure for a sustainability
statement.
Question ID 296 – Location of ESRS 2-related Disclosure
Requirements in topical standards
Release date
May 2024
1 This ID received an editorial update in July 2024: The previous reference ‘ESRS 2 General
Disclosures’ has been changed to ‘ESRS 2 SBM-3 related disclosures’.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 62 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question asked
Do the ESRS 2-related Disclosure Requirements in topical standards have to be reported in the
general section of the sustainability statement or in the respective topical section?
ESRS reference
All topical ESRS
Key terms
ESRS 2-related Disclosure Requirements in topical standards
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 115 states: ‘The undertaking shall structure its sustainability statement in four
parts in the following order: general information, environmental information (including
disclosures pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852), social information and governance
information. Respecting the provision in section 3.6 Material impacts or risks arising from actions
to address sustainability matters of this Standard, when information provided in one part contains
information to be reported in another part, the undertaking may refer in one part to information
presented in another part, avoiding duplications.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 49 states: ‘The undertaking may disclose the descriptive information required
in paragraph 46 (reference to ESRS 2 SBM-3 Disclosure Requirement) alongside the disclosures
provided under the corresponding topical ESRS, in which case it shall still present a statement of
its material impacts, risks and opportunities alongside its disclosures prepared under this chapter
of ESRS 2.’
ESRS 2-related disclosures in topical standards are identified by reference to ESRS 2 Disclosure
Requirements as follows: ‘Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 GOV-1 … ESRS 2 GOV-3 …
ESRS 2 SBM-2 … ESRS 2 SBM-3 … and … ESRS 2 IRO-1’.
Answer
ESRS 2-related Disclosure Requirements in topical standards must be reported in the general
section of the sustainability statement as they are part of the general disclosures of ESRS 2. They
are presented alongside the relevant ESRS 2 disclosure (e.g., ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement IRO-
1-related).
For the descriptive information required in ESRS 2 paragraph 46 (ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement
SBM-3-related disclosures), there is an option to present them alongside the relevant topical
disclosure if the undertaking elects to follow the option in ESRS 2 paragraph 49.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 63 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question ID 401 - Include quantitative information in qualitative
information
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
When completing the narrative response for the ‘Description of the key products and materials
that come out of the undertaking’s production process’, can the quantitative metrics that are also
required to be disclosed be included (i.e., the total waste generated in mass)? Additionally, can
derivative metrics that are not required but that provide additional detail such as total waste to
revenue or total waste to enterprise value be included in the narrative response?
ESRS reference
ESRS E5 Disclosure Requirement E5-5
Key terms
Quantitative metrics, resource outflows, ESRS E5 Disclosure Requirement E5-5
Background
ESRS E5-5 states that an undertaking shall disclose information on its resource inflows, including
waste, related to its material impacts, risks and opportunities.
ESRS 1 paragraph 19 states that: ‘When preparing its sustainability statement, the undertaking
shall apply:
(a) the fundamental qualitative characteristics of information, i.e. relevance and faithful
representation; and
(b) the enhancing qualitative characteristics of information, i.e. comparability, verifiability
and understandability.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 11 states: ‘In addition to the disclosure requirements laid down in the three
categories of ESRS, when an undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not
covered or not covered with sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific
facts and circumstances, it shall provide additional entity-specific disclosures to enable users to
understand the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities . Application
requirements AR 1 to AR 5 provide further guidance regarding entity-specific disclosures.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 73 states: ‘The undertaking shall apply the requirements for the content of
disclosures in this provision when it discloses on the metrics it has in place with regard to each
material sustainability matter.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 75 states that: ‘The undertaking shall disclose any metrics that it uses to
evaluate performance and effectiveness, in relation to a material impact, risk or opportunity.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 64 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Answer
Yes, it is allowed, or even required, on an entity-specific basis following ESRS 1 paragraph 11, to
include quantitative data in the description of resource inflows, and to disclose additional non-
standardised metrics when such quantitative data are needed to enable users to understand the
undertaking’s material sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities. This approach is not
only valid for the disclosures in E5-5 but in general for all the qualitative disclosures in ESRS.
Question ID 426 – Structure of the sustainability statement
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
I wish to know the structure of the sustainability statement that needs to be published in the
management report. While you have provided a structure in ESRS 1 Appendix F, it seems to not
be detailed. Are we meant to follow the exact format as given under each ESRS? Is there a
template that can be provided to effectively disclose information?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 8, ESRS 1 Appendix F
Key terms
Structure of ESRS the sustainability statement
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 111 states: ‘Sustainability information shall be presented:
(a) in a way that allows for a distinction between information required by disclosures in ESRS
and other information included in the management report; and
(b) under a structure that facilitates access to and understanding of the sustainability
statement in a format that is both human-readable and machine-readable.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 115 states: ‘The undertaking shall structure its sustainability statement in four
parts in the following order: general information, environmental information (including
disclosures pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852), social information and governance
information. Respecting the provision in section 3.6 Material impacts or risks arising from actions
to address sustainability matters of this Standard, when information provided in one part contains
information to be reported in another part, the undertaking may refer in one part to information
presented in another part, avoiding duplications. The undertaking may apply the detailed
structure illustrated in Appendix F of this Standard.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 65 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Answer
No, there is no requirement in ESRS to follow the exact format as given under each ESRS.
The only ESRS requirement is the following: ‘The undertaking shall structure its sustainability
statement in four parts in the following order: general information, environmental information
(including disclosures pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852), social information and
governance information.’ In addition, the undertaking may consider incorporation by reference
subject to the requirements in ESRS 1 chapter 9.1 Incorporation by reference.
ESRS 1 Appendix F provides an example on how to structure the sustainability statement aligned
with the general requirements under chapter 8 of ESRS 1 without further limiting the flexibility of
the preparers when presenting the related disclosures.
To note:
The structure of the sustainability statement shall meet the qualitative characteristics of
information (see ESRS 1 Appendix B).
The digital ESRS XBRL Taxonomy may help to prepare the sustainability statement in a structured
way. Starting to prepare the mapping of the information to be reported with the digital ESRS XBRL
Taxonomy will facilitate the subsequent tagging of the ESG information required by the machine-
readable format. Therefore, EFRAG encourages to take inspiration from the digital ESRS XBRL
Taxonomy to structure the sustainability disclosures. IG 3 List of ESRS Data Points offers a useful
tool to perform this exercise.
Currently, there is no detailed template for the sustainability statement. EFRAG might consider
providing a template in the future.
Question ID 762 – Location of policies, actions and targets in the
sustainability report
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
(1) In relation to Minimum Disclosure Requirements (MDR) on policies, actions and targets,
shall the undertaking report them:
i. all aggregated in three blocks, each for policies, actions and targets; or
ii. disaggregated, i.e. each policy together with the related action(s) and target(s)?
(2) What if policies, actions or targets are related to more than one topical standard?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraphs 13, 115 and AR 18; ESRS 1 chapter 3.6 Material impacts or risks arising from
actions to address sustainability matters; ESRS 2 paragraphs 61 and 71
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 66 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Key terms
Structure of the sustainability statement; policies, actions and targets
Background
The question received, ‘In relation to MDR on policies, actions and targets, should the undertaking
report in each topical standard one or multiple policies, actions and targets? If so, should the
undertaking report topical datapoints related to each policy, action or target in one block or for
each policy?’ was modified to be able to address it more precisely and to add more nuance to the
question.
ESRS 1 paragraph 13 states: ‘The undertaking shall apply the minimum disclosure requirements
regarding policies, actions, metrics and targets together with the corresponding Disclosure
Requirements in topical and sector-specific ESRS.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 115 states: ‘The undertaking shall structure its sustainability statement in four
parts in the following order: general information, environmental information (including
disclosures pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852), social information and governance
information. Respecting the provision in Section 3.6 Material impacts or risks arising from actions
to address sustainability matters of this Standard, when information provided in one part contains
information to be reported in another part, the undertaking may refer in one part to information
presented in another part, avoiding duplications. The undertaking may apply the detailed
structure illustrated in Appendix F of this Standard.’
ESRS 1 paragraph AR 18 states: ‘As an illustration for paragraph 115 in section 8.2 Content and
structure of the sustainability statement of this Standard, the undertaking that covers
environmental and social matters in the same policy may cross-refer. That means that the
undertaking may report on the policy in its environmental disclosures and cross-refer to it from
the relevant social disclosures and vice versa. Consolidated presentation of policies across topics
is allowed.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 61 on MDR on policies and actions states: ‘The corresponding disclosures shall
be located alongside disclosures prescribed by the relevant ESRS. When a single policy or the
same actions address several interconnected sustainability matters, the undertaking may disclose
the required information in its reporting under one topical ESRS and cross-reference to it in its
reporting under other topical ESRS.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 71 on metrics and targets states: ‘The corresponding disclosures shall be
located alongside disclosures prescribed by the topical ESRS.’
ESRS 1 chapter 3.6 paragraphs 52 and 53 state:
‘52. The undertaking’s materiality assessment may lead to the identification of situations
in which its actions to address certain impacts or risks, or to benefit from certain
opportunities in relation to a sustainability matter, might have material negative
impacts or cause material risks in relation to one or more other sustainability
matters. For example:
(a) an action plan to decarbonise production that involves abandoning certain
products might have material negative impacts on the undertaking’s own
workforce and result in material risks due to redundancy payments; or
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 67 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(b) an action plan of an automotive supplier to focus on the supply of e-vehicles might
lead to stranded assets for the production of supply parts for conventional vehicles.
53. In such situations, the undertaking shall:
(a) disclose the existence of material negative impacts or material risks together with
the actions that generate them, with a cross-reference to the topic to which the
impacts or risks relate; and
(b) provide a description of how the material negative impacts or material risks are
addressed under the topic to which they relate.’
Answer
(1) In relation to Minimum Disclosure Requirements (MDR) on policies, actions and targets,
shall the undertaking report them:
i. all aggregated in three blocks each for policies, actions, and targets; or
ii. disaggregated, i.e. each policy together with the related action(s) and target(s)?
The structure of the sustainability statement shall be presented in four parts as prescribed by
ESRS 1 paragraph 115. The undertaking shall apply the minimum disclosure requirements
regarding policies, actions, metrics and targets together with the corresponding Disclosure
Requirements in topical and sector-specific ESRS (ESRS 1 paragraph 13).
Both alternatives are possible provided that the qualitative characteristics of information (see
ESRS 1 chapter 2) are met. A combination of approach (a) and (b) is also possible. Reference from
one part of the sustainability statement to another is allowed, avoiding duplications (ESRS 1
paragraph 115).
(2) What if policies, actions or targets relate to more than one topical standard?
When a single policy or the same actions address more than one sustainability topic, the
undertaking may disclose the required information in its reporting under one topical ESRS and
cross-reference to it in its reporting under other topical ESRS (see ESRS 1 paragraph 61).
ESRS 2 paragraph 71 requires that metrics and targets be located alongside the disclosures
prescribed by the topical ESRS. ESRS 2 does not specify what to do when the same metric or the
same target covers more than one sustainability topic.
See also Question ID 426 Structure of the sustainability statement.
Question ID 906 – Structure of sustainability statement – annex /
appendix possible?
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Is there the possibility to implement an ‘Appendix’ as another part of the sustainability statement
(mainly for the content index, EU datapoint table, etc.)?
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 68 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 8.2; ESRS 2 paragraphs 56 and 119
Key terms
Structure of the sustainability statement; content index; EU-datapoint table; potential appendix
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 115 states: ‘The undertaking shall structure its sustainability statement in four
parts in the following order: general information, environmental information (including
disclosures pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852), social information and governance
information. Respecting the provision in Section 3.6 Material impacts or risks arising from actions
to address sustainability matters of this Standard, when information provided in one part contains
information to be reported in another part, the undertaking may refer in one part to information
presented in another part, avoiding duplications. The undertaking may apply the detailed
structure illustrated in Appendix F of this Standard.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 56 states: ‘The undertaking shall include a list of the Disclosure Requirements
complied with in preparing the sustainability statement, following the outcome of the materiality
assessment (see ESRS 1 Chapter 3), including the page numbers and/or paragraphs where the
related disclosures are located in the sustainability statement. This may be presented as a content
index. The undertaking shall also include a table of all the datapoints that derive from other EU
legislation as listed in Appendix B of this standard, indicating where they can be found in the
sustainability statement and including those that the undertaking has assessed as not material,
in which case the undertaking shall indicate “Not material” in the table in accordance with ESRS1
paragraph 35.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 119 states: ‘Provided that the conditions in paragraph 120 are met, information
prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement of an ESRS, including a specific datapoint prescribed by a
Disclosure Requirement, may be incorporated in the sustainability statement by reference to:
(a) another section of the management report;
(b) the financial statements;
(c) the corporate governance statement (if not part of the management report) …’
ESRS 1 paragraph 120 states: ‘The undertaking may incorporate information by reference to the
documents, or part of the documents, listed in paragraph 119, provided that the disclosures
incorporated by reference:
(a) constitute a separate element of information and are clearly identified in the document
concerned as addressing the relevant Disclosure Requirement, or the relevant specific
datapoint prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement;
(b) are published before or at the same time as the management report;
(c) are in the same language as the sustainability statement;
(d) are subject to at least the same level of assurance as the sustainability statement; and
(e) meet the same technical digitalisation requirements as the sustainability statement.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 69 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Answer
It is possible to have the content index and the EU datapoint table as another section of the
management report.
The sustainability statement shall consist of four parts (ESRS 1 paragraph 56). The first part is
related to general information. As the content index and the datapoints that derive from other
EU legislation are part of the ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement IRO-2 – Disclosure Requirements in
ESRS covered by the undertaking’s sustainability statement, they need to be included in the part
related to general information. However, information can, subject to the incorporation by
reference requirements of ESRS 1 paragraph 120, also be placed in ‘another section of the
management report’ (ESRS 1 paragraph 119 (a)).
See also Question ID 628 Content index.
ESRS 1 chapter 9 Linkages with other parts of corporate reporting and
connected information
Question ID 243 - Reference to financial statements
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Can you explain and give more context to the datapoint in ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (f)?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 9; ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (f)
Key Terms
Cross-reference to financial statements, ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-6
Background
ESRS S1-6 paragraph 50 (f) requires undertakings to disclose: ‘a cross-reference of the information
reported under (a) above to the most representative number in the financial statements.’
ESRS S1-6 paragraph 50 (a) requests the ‘total number of employees by head count and
breakdowns by gender and by country for countries in which the undertaking has 50 or more
employees representing at least 10% of its total number of employees.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 124 addresses the matter of connectivity with financial statements and states:
‘when the sustainability statement includes monetary amounts or other quantitative datapoints
that exceed a threshold of materiality and that are presented in the financial statements (direct
connectivity between information disclosed in sustainability statements and information
disclosed in financial statements), the undertaking shall include a reference to the relevant
paragraph of its financial statements where the corresponding information can be found.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 70 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Directive 2013/34/EU, Article 16 describes the ‘Content of the notes to the financial statements
relating to all undertakings’ and requires the disclosure of (1)(h) ‘the average number of
employees during the financial year.’
Answer
This datapoint requirement is based on the principle of connectivity between the sustainability
statement and the financial statement, which is described in ESRS 1 chapter 9.2. In paragraphs
124 and 125 of this chapter, a distinction is made between direct connectivity (paragraph 124)
and indirect connectivity (paragraph 125). In both cases, the principle is that monetary or
quantitative amounts that exceed the threshold of materiality shall be cross-referenced from the
sustainability statement to the financial statements; for indirect connectivity, this means
explaining how these amounts relate to the most relevant amounts presented in the financial
statements. Where appropriate, a reconciliation may be provided, and it may be presented in
tabular form.
On this basis, the objective of ESRS 1 S1-6 paragraph 50 (f) is to cross-check the number of
employees required by paragraph 50 (a) against the most appropriate amount disclosed in the
financial statements. This includes the average number of employees during the year, disclosed
according to Article 16 of the Directive 2013/34/EU as transposed into the laws of each EU
Member State, and other relevant data if they are disclosed in the financial statements.
Given that ESRS S1-6 provides some flexibility in terms of methodology for calculating the head
count number of employees (i.e., average or at the end of the year), the undertaking is required
to disclose the methodology used as per paragraph 50 (d)(ii). If an undertaking uses a different
methodology for calculating the head count between the note to the financial statements and this
datapoint in ESRS S1-6 (e.g., average for the former, end of the year for the latter), it shall explain
the difference in the basis for calculation following the principle of connectivity defined in ESRS 1.
Question ID 1047 – Conditions for incorporation by reference and
content index
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Is it mandatory to make explicit reference to the specific Disclosure Requirement when
incorporating by reference, or is referring to Disclosure Requirements in other parts of the annual
report in the IRO-2 table sufficient?
ESRS Reference
ESRS 1 paragraphs 119 and 120; ESRS 2 paragraph 56 (content index requirement)
Key terms
Incorporation by reference; content index
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 71 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
ESRS 1 paragraphs 119 and 120 state:
‘119. Provided that the conditions in paragraph 120 are met, information prescribed by a
Disclosure Requirement of an ESRS, including a specific datapoint prescribed by a Disclosure
Requirement, may be incorporated in the sustainability statement by reference to:
(a) another section of the management report;
(b) the financial statements;
(c) the corporate governance statement (if not part of the management report);
(d) the remuneration report required by Directive 2007/36/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council (9);
(e) the universal registration document, as referred to in Article 9 of Regulation (EU)
2017/1129(10); and
(f) public disclosures under Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and
of the Council (11) (Pillar 3 disclosures). If the undertaking incorporates by reference
information from Pillar 3 disclosures, it shall ensure that the information matches the
scope of consolidation used for the sustainability statement by complementing the
incorporated information with additional elements as necessary.
120. The undertaking may incorporate information by reference to the documents, or part of
the documents, listed in paragraph 119, provided that the disclosures incorporated by
reference:
(a) constitute a separate element of information and are clearly identified in the
document concerned as addressing the relevant Disclosure Requirement, or the
relevant specific datapoint prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement;
(b) are published before or at the same time as the management report;
(c) are in the same language as the sustainability statement;
(d) are subject to at least the same level of assurance as the sustainability statement;
and
(e) meet the same technical digitalisation requirements as the sustainability statement.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 56 states: ‘The undertaking shall include a list of the Disclosure Requirements
complied with in preparing the sustainability statement, following the outcome of the materiality
assessment (see ESRS 1 Chapter 3), including the page numbers and/or paragraphs where the
related disclosures are located in the sustainability statement. This may be presented as a content
index. The undertaking shall also include a table of all the datapoints that derive from other EU
legislation as listed in Appendix B of this Standard, indicating where they can be found in the
sustainability statement and including those that the undertaking has assessed as not material, in
which case the undertaking shall indicate “not material” in the table in accordance with ESRS 1
paragraph 35.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 72 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Answer
Yes, it is mandatory to make explicit reference in the sustainability statement to the specific
Disclosure Requirement (and, where applicable, to the datapoint of a Disclosure Requirement)
when incorporating by reference. At the same time, it is also necessary to clearly identify in the
source document (i.e. the document that the sustainability statement refers to) the content that
the undertaking intends to incorporate by reference as the information that corresponds to the
relevant ESRS Disclosure Requirement (or the relevant specific datapoint) prescribed by an ESRS
Disclosure Requirement.
Incorporation by reference according to ESRS 1 paragraph 119 requires that all the conditions of
ESRS 1 paragraph 120 be met. One of those conditions is that the disclosure incorporated by
reference ‘constitute a separate element of information and be clearly identified in the document
concerned as addressing the relevant Disclosure Requirement(s), or the relevant specific
datapoint(s) prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement’ (see ESRS 1 paragraph 120(a)). Reference in
the sustainability statement only – for example, as part of the ‘content index’ as required by ESRS 1
paragraph 56 – to the sections that are incorporated by reference is not sufficient to meet the
ESRS 1 paragraph 120(a) requirement. A clear identification in the document incorporated by
reference (for example, in another section of the management report or the financial statements)
addressing the relevant Disclosure Requirement(s) or the datapoint(s) is also needed.
ESRS 1 chapter 10 Transitional provisions
Question ID 204 - Phase-in for first-time large undertakings
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Companies that become ‘large undertakings’ for the first time: do they benefit from the Phase-In
Requirements?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraph 137 and Appendix C: List of phased-in Disclosures Requirements
Key terms
Phase-in requirements, first-time large undertaking
Background
The only question by the submitter marked as ‘1: explanation’ is answered here. The submitter
also had a second question: ‘Are the ESRS requirements applicable from the year they exceed
the thresholds?’ which is not in scope of the Q&A platform and was forwarded to the European
Commission.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 73 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS 1 section 10.4 paragraph 137 states: ‘Appendix C List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements
in this Standard sets phase-in provisions for the Disclosure Requirements or datapoints of
Disclosure Requirements in ESRS that may be omitted or that are not applicable in the first year(s)
of preparation of the sustainability statement under the ESRS.’
In setting phase-ins, ESRS 1 Appendix C uses the wording ‘. . . for the first year (for the first two
years/for the first three years) of preparation of its sustainability statement . . .’
Answer
As stated in ESRS 1 Appendix C, the phase-in requirements apply to the first year, to the first two
years or to the first three years ‘of preparation of its sustainability report’. All undertakings
meeting the criteria of the Accounting Directive (Directive 2013/34/EU) Article 3 of large
undertakings (groups) may benefit from the phase-in requirements listed in ESRS 1 Appendix C,
including undertakings that become ‘large undertakings’ for the first time.
Question ID 291 - Phase-in 750 employees and topical standards
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Are the ESRS 2 related Disclosure Requirements in topical standards also subject to the one- / two-
year phase-in of ESRS 1 for 750 or less employee undertakings?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 Appendix C: List of phase-in Disclosure Requirements
Key terms
Phase-in less than 750 employees, ESRS 2 related disclosures in topical standards
Background
For the topical standards of ESRS E4, S1, S2, S3 and S4, ESRS 1 Appendix C has the following phase-
in provision for all disclosure requirements of the respective ESRS:
‘Undertakings or groups not exceeding on their balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year (on a consolidated basis where applicable) may omit the
information specified in the disclosure requirements of ESRS (reference of the standard, see
above) for the first two years (for ESRS S1, “first year”) of preparation of their sustainability
statement.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 2 states: ‘In the preparation of disclosures under this Standard, the undertaking
shall apply the Disclosure Requirements (including their datapoints) set in topical ESRS, as listed
in Appendix C of this Standard Disclosure/Application Requirements in topical ESRS that are
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 74 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
applicable jointly with ESRS 2 General Disclosures. The undertaking shall apply the requirements
listed in Appendix C: (a) in all instances for the requirements in topical standards related to
Disclosure Requirement IRO-1 Description of the processes to identify and assess material
impacts, risks and opportunities; and (b) for all other requirements listed in Appendix C only if the
sustainability topic is material based on the undertaking’s materiality assessment (see ESRS 1
chapter 3 Double materiality as the basis for sustainability disclosures).’
ESRS 2 paragraph 17 states: ‘If an undertaking or group not exceeding on its balance sheet date
the average number of 750 employees during the financial year decides to omit the information
required by ESRS E4, ESRS S1, ESRS S2, ESRS S3 or ESRS S4 in accordance with Appendix C of ESRS
1, it shall nevertheless disclose whether the sustainability topics covered respectively by ESRS E4,
ESRS S1, ESRS S2, ESRS S3 and ESRS S4 have been assessed to be material as a result of the
undertaking’s materiality assessment. In addition, if one or more of these topics has been
assessed to be material, the undertaking shall, for each material topic:
(a) disclose the list of matters (i.e., topic, subtopic or sub-subtopic) in AR16 ESRS 1 Appendix A
that are assessed to be material and briefly describe how the undertaking’s business model
and strategy take account of the impacts of the undertaking related to those matters. The
undertaking may identify the matter at the level of topic, subtopic or sub-subtopic;
(b) briefly describe any time-bound targets it has set related to the matters in question, the
progress it has made towards achieving those targets, and whether its targets related to
biodiversity and ecosystems are based on conclusive scientific evidence;
(c) briefly describe its policies in relation to the matters in question;
(d) briefly describe actions it has taken to identify, monitor, prevent, mitigate, remediate or
bring an end to actual or potential adverse impacts related to the matters in question, and
the result of such actions; and;
(e) disclose metrics relevant to the matters in question.’
Answer
Yes.
ESRS 1 Appendix C states that the phase-in provisions relate to all disclosure requirements of the
topical standards. The term ‘all disclosure requirements’ also includes Disclosure Requirements in
the respective chapters in ‘ESRS 2 General Disclosures’ of the topical standards ESRS E4, S1, S2, S3
and S4.
However, the provisions of ESRS 1 Appendix C in relation to phase-in are to be read in conjunction
with ESRS 2 paragraph 17, which establishes minimum disclosures for the topics that have been
phased-in and that are material to the undertaking. To comply with these minimum disclosures,
a materiality analysis at the topical level is therefore needed to identify the material topics of ESRS
E4, S1, S2, S3 or S4.
See also Question ID 58 –- Transitional provisions 750 employees
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 75 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question ID 910 – Transitional provisions for value chain and Scope 3
GHG emissions
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Can the transitional provision in ESRS 1 paragraphs 132 to 135 be applied to the reporting of
Scope 3 emissions in ESRS E1 paragraph 44 (c)?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraphs 132 to 135, ESRS 1 Appendix C: List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements;
ESRS 2 Appendix B: List of datapoints in cross-cutting and topical standards that derive from other
EU legislation; and ESRS E1 paragraph 44 (c)
Key Terms
Value chain, transitional provisions, Scope 3 GHG emissions
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph 44 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose in metric tonnes of CO2eq its:
(a) gross Scope 1 GHG emissions;
(b) gross Scope 2 GHG emissions;
(c) gross Scope 3 GHG emissions; and
(d) total GHG emissions.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 133 states: ‘For the first three years of its sustainability reporting under the
ESRS, in order to take account of the difficulties that undertakings may encounter in gathering
information from actors throughout their value chain and in order to limit the burden for SMEs
in the value chain:
(a) when disclosing information on policies, actions and targets in accordance with ESRS 2
and other ESRS, the undertaking may limit upstream and downstream value chain
information to information available in-house, such as data already available to the
undertaking and publicly available information; and
(b) when disclosing metrics, the undertaking is not required to include upstream and
downstream value chain information except for datapoints derived from other EU
legislation, as listed in ESRS 2 Appendix B.’
Answer
No, the transitional provisions outlined in ESRS 1 paragraphs 132 to 135 cannot be applied to
reporting Scope 3 emissions as required by ESRS E1 paragraph 44 (c). A phase-in exception applies
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 76 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
to undertakings or groups not exceeding on their balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year.
The disclosure of Scope 3 emissions is a datapoint derived from EU legislation, as indicated in
ESRS 2 Appendix B (Disclosure Requirement and related datapoint: ESRS E1-6 Gross Scope 1, 2, 3
and Total GHG emissions paragraph 44). Despite the transitional provisions of ESRS 1 paragraph
133 (b), datapoints derived from EU legislation, such as Scope 3 emissions, shall be reported.
It is, however, noteworthy that ‘undertakings or groups not exceeding on their balance sheet
dates the average number of 750 employees during the financial year (on a consolidated basis
where applicable) may omit the datapoints on Scope 3 emissions and total GHG emissions for the
first year of preparation of their sustainability statement’ (see ESRS 1 Appendix C: List of phased-
in Disclosure Requirements).
Question ID 923 – Phase-in entity-specific disclosures
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Do undertakings need to include entity-specific disclosures for the first three years of reporting?
ESRS Reference
ESRS 1 paragraph 131
Key terms
Phase-in requirements; entity-specific disclosures
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 131 states: ‘When defining its entity-specific disclosures, the undertaking may
adopt transitional measures for their preparation in the first three annual sustainability
statements under which it may as a priority:
(a) introduce in its reporting those entity-specific disclosures that it reported in prior periods
if these disclosures meet or are adapted to meet the qualitative characteristics of
information referred to under Chapter 2 of this Standard; and
(b) complement its disclosures prepared on the basis of the topical ESRS with an appropriate
set of additional disclosures to cover sustainability matters that are material for the
undertaking in its sector(s), using available best practice and/or available frameworks or
reporting standards, such as IFRS industry-based guidance and GRI Sector Standards.’
Answer
Yes, entity-specific disclosures are required for the first three years of reporting of sustainability
information.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 77 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS 1 paragraph 131 only gives a three-year transition period for the preparation of the entity-
specific disclosures under which the undertaking may as a priority derive those measures from
ESRS 1 paragraph (a) or (b). ESRS 1 paragraph 131 does not provide a phase-in for entity-specific
provisions in general.
See also ESRS 1 Chapter 10.2 Transitional provision related to Chapter 5 value chain taking
precedence.
Question ID 1090 – Length of transitional provisions for early
adopters
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Which year does the phase-in apply for a company that voluntarily publishes a CSRD report one
year prior to being required? What about comparative information?
ESRS Reference
ESRS 1 paragraph 136 and 137; ESRS 1 Appendix C: List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements
Key terms
Phase-in requirements; comparative information; early adopters
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 136 states: ‘To ease the first-time application of this Standard, the undertaking
is not required to disclose the comparative information required by section 7.1 Presenting
comparative information in the first year of preparation of the sustainability statement under the
ESRS.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 137 states: ‘Appendix C: List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements in this
Standard sets phase-in provisions for the Disclosure Requirements or datapoints of Disclosure
Requirements in ESRS that may be omitted or that are not applicable in the first year(s) of
preparation of the sustainability statement under the ESRS.’
Answer
The voluntarily publication of sustainability statements one year earlier than required under the
CSRD does not affect the phase-in requirement periods granted by ESRS 1.
Voluntary early application of the ESRS sustainability statement by an undertaking does not count
in respect of the years of preparation under ESRS, is not recognised legally, and therefore does
not affect the date from when the phase-ins should be calculated. Accordingly, in the year of
mandatory application of ESRS, the undertaking may present its sustainability statement without
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 78 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
comparative information in accordance with ESRS 1 paragraph 136 even if it has prepared a
voluntary sustainability statement in the preceding year.
Question ID 1144 – Phase-in 750 employees: Calculation of average
number
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
In the phase-in section, companies with 750 or more employees shall start reporting from the
first year. The question is how to calculate the number of employees for this. Should it be done
on a headcount or a full-time-equivalent basis?
ESRS Reference
ESRS 1 Appendix C
Key terms
Phase-in less than 750 employees; phase-in requirements
Background
The question received, ‘In the phase-in section, companies with 750 or more employees have to
start reporting from the first year. The question is how to calculate the number of employees for
this. For, e.g., if I count by head count that a company has 800 employees, the company must
comply with ESRS and start reporting from the first year. But, if I count employees by FTEs, it is
700. So, the company can opt for phase-out’, was modified to the above question to be more
precise.
ESRS 1 Appendix C: List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements has six phase-in provisions
applicable for ‘undertakings or groups not exceeding on their balance sheet dates the average
number of 750 employees during the financial year (on a consolidated basis where applicable)’.
Answer
The ‘average number of employees’ shall be calculated in line with the size criteria as stipulated
in the Accounting Directive (Directive 2013/34/EU) Article 3.
The Accounting Directive in Article 3 used the term ‘average number of employees during the
financial year’. This is exactly the same term used in ESRS 1 Appendix C, aligning ESRS to the
wording and requirement used in the Accounting Directive. The Accounting Directive has been
transposed in the national laws of the Member States and it is expected that, based on this
transposition, each Member State or country has a well-established guidance and practice for
how to calculate the average number of employees during the financial year. The requirements
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 79 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
transposed in national law shall be applied to determine the number of employees for the ‘750
employee phase-in’ provision.
Accordingly, also considering connectivity with financial statements, the number calculated for
and reported in financial statements shall be consistent with that used for ESRS 1 Appendix C, i.e.
the ‘750 employee criteria’.
See also ESRS 2 paragraph 17 relating to the use of the ‘750 employee phase-in provision’ and the
applicable Disclosure Requirements when making use of that provision.
ESRS 2 General disclosures
ESRS 2 General disclosures
Questions related to all Disclosure Requirements
Question ID 177 – Mapping sustainability matters as listed in ESRS 1
paragraph AR 16 with Disclosure Requirements
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Is there a mapping link between the sustainability matters listed in ESRS 1 paragraph AR 16 and
the Disclosure Requirements in the topical standards or must judgement be used in deciding the
disclosures required for a material sustainability matter?
Answer
Due to its importance and size ID 177 has been placed in a separate document:
Question ID 177 - Mapping of sustainability matters to topical disclosures (Q&A ID 177)
Question ID 733 – Overlap of ESRS 2 and topical standards
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Can the ESRS 2 datapoints be overlapping with those in topical standards? What would be the
scope of information the preparer is expected to provide within ESRS 2 (that is distinctive of
topical standards datapoints)?
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 80 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraph 115; ESRS 2 paragraph 2 and Appendix C; Disclosure Requirements related to
ESRS 2 in the topical ESRS
Key terms
ESRS 2-related disclosures in topical standards; structure of the sustainability statement
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 115 states: ‘The undertaking shall structure its sustainability statement in four
parts in the following order: general information, environmental information … social
information, and governance information. Respecting the provision in Section 3.6 Material
impacts or risks arising from actions to address sustainability matters of this Standard, when
information provided in one part contains information to be reported in another part, the
undertaking may refer in one part to information presented in another part, avoiding
duplications.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 2 states: ‘In the preparation of disclosures under this Standard, the undertaking
shall apply the Disclosure Requirements (including their datapoints) set in topical ESRS, as listed
in Appendix C of this Standard Disclosure/Application Requirements in topical ESRS that are
applicable in conjunction with ESRS 2 General Disclosures. The undertaking shall apply the
requirements listed in Appendix C:
(a) in all instances for the requirements in topical standards related to Disclosure
Requirement IRO-1 Description of the processes to identify and assess material impacts,
risks and opportunities; and
(b) for all other requirements listed in Appendix C, only if the sustainability topic is material
based on the undertaking’s materiality assessment (see ESRS 1 Chapter 3 Double
materiality as the basis for sustainability disclosures).’
Answer
No, the ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirements do not overlap with the Disclosure Requirements in
topical ESRS with the exception of the Minimum Disclosure Requirements (MDRs) in ESRS 2
Chapter 4.2 Minimum disclosure requirement on policies and actions and chapter 5 Metrics and
targets.
The MDR may overlap by definition with those in the topical standards as they are a checklist to
be used for completeness: i.e. when a datapoint in MDR is already covered by a topical standard,
undertakings are not supposed to report twice the same information.
Some Disclosure Requirements in the topical ESRS (labelled ‘Disclosure Requirement related to
ESRS 2 GOV-1, GOV-3, SBM-2, SBM-3 or IRO-1 …’ in the respective topical ESRS; see Appendix C of
ERSR 2) further specify the ESRS 2 disclosures in relation to the respective topical matter (see
ESRS 2 paragraph 2).
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 81 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
The ESRS 2 disclosures, together with their specifications in topical ESRS, are expected to be
disclosed as part of the general information of the sustainability statement. To avoid duplications,
an undertaking may refer in one part of the sustainability statement to information presented in
another part as stated in ESRS 1 paragraph 115.
See also Question ID 296 – Location of ESRS 2-related Disclosure Requirement of topical standards.
ESRS 2 BP-2 Disclosure in relation to specific circumstances
Question ID 58 - Transitional provisions 750 employees
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
If Appendix C of ESRS 1 allows companies under 750 employees to omit E4 and S1-4 for the first
three years, why does ESRS 2 paragraph 17 then say that the information still needs to be
disclosed if considered material? Is there a difference in granularity of information disclosed?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 Appendix C; ESRS 2 paragraph 17
Key terms
Phase-in 750 employees
Background
ESRS 2 paragraph 17 states the following: ‘If an undertaking or group not exceeding on its balance
sheet date the average number of 750 employees during the financial year decides to omit the
information required by ESRS E4, ESRS S1, ESRS S2, ESRS S3 or ESRS S4 in accordance with
Appendix C of ESRS 1, it shall nevertheless disclose whether the sustainability topics covered
respectively by ESRS E4, ESRS S1, ESRS S2, ESRS S3 and ESRS S4 have been assessed to be material
as a result of the undertaking’s materiality assessment. In addition, if one or more of these topics
has been assessed to be material, the undertaking shall, for each material topic:
(a) disclose the list of matters (i.e. topic, sub-topic or sub-sub-topic) in AR 16 ESRS 1 Appendix
A that are assessed to be material and briefly describe how the undertaking’s business
model and strategy take account of the impacts of the undertaking related to those matters.
The undertaking may identify the matter at the level of topic, sub-topic or sub-sub-topic;
(b) briefly describe any time-bound targets it has set related to the matters in question, the
progress it has made towards achieving those targets, and whether its targets related
to biodiversity and ecosystems are based on conclusive scientific evidence;
(c) briefly describe its policies in relation to the matters in question;
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 82 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(d) briefly describe actions it has taken to identify, monitor, prevent, mitigate, remediate or
bring an end to actual or potential adverse impacts related to the matters in question, and
the result of such actions; and
(e) disclose metrics relevant to the matters in question.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 137 states: ‘Appendix C List of phase-in Disclosure Requirements in this
Standard sets phase-in provisions for the Disclosure Requirements or datapoints of Disclosure
Requirements in ESRS that may be omitted or that are not applicable in the first year(s) of
preparation of the sustainability statement under the ESRS.’
Appendix C of ESRS 1 ‘List of phase-in Disclosure Requirements’ has the following table:
ESRS Disclosure Full name of the Phase-in or effective date (including the first
Requirement Disclosure year)
Requirement
ESRS E4 All disclosure All disclosure Undertakings or groups not exceeding on their
requirements requirements balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year (on a
consolidated basis where applicable) may omit
the information specified in the disclosure
requirements of ESRS E4 for the first 2 years of
preparation of their sustainability statement.
ESRS S1 All disclosure All disclosure Undertakings or groups not exceeding on their
requirements requirements balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year (on a
consolidated basis where applicable) may omit
the information specified in the disclosure
requirements of ESRS S1 for the first year of
preparation of their sustainability statement.
ESRS S2 All disclosure All disclosure Undertakings or groups not exceeding on their
requirements requirements balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year (on a
consolidated basis where applicable) may omit
the information specified in the disclosure
requirements of ESRS S2 for the first 2 years of
preparation of their sustainability statement.
ESRS S3 All disclosure All disclosure Undertakings or groups not exceeding on their
requirements requirements balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year (on a
consolidated basis where applicable) may omit
the information specified in the disclosure
requirements of ESRS S3 for the first 2 years of
preparation of their sustainability statement.
ESRS S4 All disclosure All disclosure Undertakings or groups not exceeding on their
requirements requirements balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year (on a
consolidated basis where applicable) may omit
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 83 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
the information specified in the disclosure
requirements of ESRS S4 for the first 2 years of
preparation of their sustainability statement.
Answer
The transitional provisions apply to undertakings or groups not exceeding on their balance sheet
dates the average number of 750 employees during the financial year (on a consolidated basis
where applicable). The option is to omit the information required by all the disclosure
requirements in the following topical standards: ESRS E4, ESRS S1, ESRS S2, ESRS S3 and ESRS S4.
The regime of these provisions varies depending on the topical standard. The transitional
provisions on ESRS S1 only apply to the first year of preparation of the undertaking’s sustainability
statement. For ESRS E4, ESRS S2, ESRS S3 and ESRS S4, the provisions apply to the first two years
of preparation of the sustainability statement.
When information about a topic is omitted, the undertaking is nevertheless required to include
the topic in the scope of the materiality assessment. When information required by one of these
topical standards is omitted but the topic is assessed to be material, ‘de minimis’ disclosures shall
be reported covering the material topic in question (ESRS 2 paragraph 17).
The materiality assessment covers the environmental, social and governance matters connected
to the undertaking as established by the CSRD (i.e., a climate-first approach or an environmental
only approach was not the intention of the co-legislators); the sustainability statement is to
include a holistic view of sustainability matters regardless of whether social standards are subject
to transitional provisions. Hence, the ESRS 2 paragraph 17 provision aims at ensuring that there
is a certain level of ‘minimal disclosures’ that are required regardless of whether the undertaking
chooses to apply the transitional provisions.
The transitional provisions allow undertakings to provide less granular information than what is
required after the transition period. The information to be provided for the matters are more
summarised (i.e., as briefly as referred to in the text) than the requirements set out in the five
topical standards mentioned above. The main simplifications in paragraph 17 compared to
paragraph 48 of ESRS 2 are the following:
(a) Paragraph 48 (a): Under ESRS 2 paragraph 17, the undertaking may choose to disclose at
topic, subtopic or sub-subtopic level, and separate disclosure of material impacts, risks
and opportunities is not required. The undertaking is not required to disclose where in its
business model, its own operations and its upstream and downstream value chain
material IROs are concentrated.
(b) Paragraph 48 (b) relates to how the undertaking takes into account material impacts on
its strategy and business model. This information related to impacts can be disclosed at
a summarised level without all the granularity required by the datapoints therein.
(c) Paragraph 48 (c) to (h) sets requirements to disclose more detailed information about
material IROs. As these are not required to be identified in the transition period, these
datapoints do not form part of the ‘de minimis’ disclosures. While this is not a
requirement, in the transitional period it may be helpful to briefly disclose the
information on paragraph 48 (c) to contextualise the material impacts identified.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 84 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS 2 paragraph 17 (b) to (e) provides de minimis information corresponding to disclosure
requirements in topical standards in case an undertaking elects not to disclose topical information
in the transition period. The transitional provision requires a summarised description of the
policies, actions and targets and does not require to fulfil the detailed datapoints in MDR (P, T, A)
in ESRS 2 and/or topical standards.
Finally, for metrics, the undertaking is to apply judgement to fulfil the requirements of metrics in
topical standards. Such judgement relates to the number and nature of metrics disclosed (i.e., the
undertaking may disclose a reduced number of metrics and not all the metrics that are material)
and the level of granularity of the metric (for example, the metric may be presented at a global
level without breakdowns).
Question ID 306 - Location of MDR (Disclosure Requirement BP-2) in
the report during phase-in 750 employees
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
In the first years of the phase-in 750 employees, where should the disclosures required by ESRS 2
Disclosure Requirement BP-2 (paragraph 17) be reported?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraph 115; ESRS 2 Minimum Disclosure Requirements paragraphs 61 and 71
Key words
Minimum disclosure requirements; phase-in less than 750 employees; transitional provisions
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 115 states: ‘The undertaking shall structure its sustainability statement in four
parts, in the following order: general information, environmental information, social information
and governance information . . . When information provided in one part contains information to
be reported in another part, the undertaking may refer in one part to information presented in
another part, avoiding duplications. The undertaking may apply the detailed structure illustrated
in Appendix F . . .’ of ESRS 1.
ESRS 2 paragraph 61 states in respect of policies and targets: ‘The minimum disclosure
requirements on policies and actions shall be located alongside disclosures prescribed by the
relevant ESRS. When a single policy or same actions address several interconnected sustainability
matters, the undertaking may disclose the required information in its reporting under one topical
ESRS and cross-reference to it in its reporting under other topical ESRS.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 71 states in respect of metrics and targets: ‘The corresponding disclosures shall
be located alongside disclosures prescribed by the topical ESRS.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 85 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Answer
The undertaking shall structure its sustainability statement in four parts (ESRS 1 paragraph 115).
ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement BP-2 (including its paragraph 17) is part of the general information
required by ESRS 2 and as such, on a literal reading of ESRS 1 paragraph 115, could be disclosed
as part of the general information, for example, together with the Disclosure Requirement SBM-
3 Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and business
model.
However, based on ESRS 1 paragraph 115, environmental, social and governance related
information can – appropriately cross-referenced - also be disclosed with the respective
environmental, social and governance related parts of the sustainability statement. This is in line
with ESRS 2 paragraph 61 on the minimum disclosure requirement for policies and actions and
with ESRS 2 paragraph 71 on metrics and targets, both allowing information to be located
alongside disclosures prescribed by the relevant topical ESRS.
Question ID 504 – Disclosure Requirements on material metrics when
information is not available
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
If the undertaking cannot disclose information regarding policies, actions or targets, it shall then
disclose this to be the case and may report on a timeframe to have these in place. Is this also the
case for metrics?
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement BP-2 – Disclosures in relation to specific circumstances, paragraph
11 Sources of estimation and outcome uncertainty
Key terms
Unavailability of information on material metrics
Background
According to ESRS 1 paragraph 33, if the undertaking has not established policies, taken actions
or set targets for the topic, then it shall disclose this to be the case and may report a timeframe
in which it aims to have these in place (see also ESRS 1 Appendix E: Flowchart for determining
disclosures under ESRS).
According to ESRS 1 paragraph 34, the undertaking shall disclose information on metrics if the
Disclosure Requirement or the individual datapoints are assessed to be material.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 86 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Clarification is needed in the case where the information of a Disclosure Requirement or
datapoint on metrics is assessed as material but the undertaking does not have the information
available.
ESRS 2 paragraph 11 requires disclosures on sources of estimation and outcome uncertainty.
Answer
No, this is not the case for metrics. The treatment of paragraph 33 of ESRS 1 is limited to policies,
actions and targets and cannot be applied by analogy to metrics – to which paragraph 34 applies
instead. Material metrics are to be reported. If the metric cannot be determined through direct
data collection, it shall be estimated.
The level of measurement uncertainty of metrics is not a reason for omitting them. According to
ESRS 2 BP-2, if a metric is subject to a high level of measurement uncertainty, the undertaking
shall disclose information about the sources of measurement uncertainty (for example,
availability and quality of data) and disclose the assumptions, approximations and judgments that
the entity has made in measuring it.
ESRS 2 GOV-1 The role of administrative, management and supervisory
bodies
https://xbrl.efrag.org/e-esrs/esrs-set1-2023.html#d1e6065-3-1
Question ID 171 and ID 358 – Administrative, management and
supervisory bodies
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Please clarify with examples what is meant by ‘administrative, management and supervisory
bodies’ as a collective versus ‘management’ and ‘management-level position’ versus ‘senior
executive management’.
[This explanation also answers question ID 358:] Could you please specify clearly what is to be
included in the administrative, management and supervisory bodies? By this, I mean, it refers to
only a highest body (Board of Directors) or it refers to another body or other bodies?
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 paragraph 22 (a) and (d)
Key terms
Administrative, management, and supervisory bodies
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 87 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
The Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms defines ‘administrative, management and
supervisory bodies’ as follows:
‘The governance bodies with the highest decision-making authority in the undertaking include its
committees. If in the governance structure there are no members of the administrative,
management or supervisory bodies of the undertaking, the CEO and, if such function exists, the
deputy CEO should be included. In some jurisdictions, governance systems consist of two tiers,
where supervision and management are separated. In such cases, both tiers are included under
the definition of administrative, management and supervisory bodies.’
GRI is also a useful source of complementary guidance: GRI uses ‘highest governance body’ as
well in reference to the ‘administrative, management and supervisory bodies’. GRI 102 requires
jurisdictions with two tiers of governance bodies to consider both as ‘highest governance bodies’.
ESRS do not define the term ‘senior executive management’. However, GRI explicitly defines
‘senior executive management’ in GRI 102 as top-ranking members of the management of an
organisation including a Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and individuals reporting directly to the CEO
or to the highest governance body. Each organisation defines which members of its management
teams are senior executives.
Undertakings might report the identity of their ‘management body’ and ‘governance body’ as part
of the corporate governance statement as they are key actors in the national corporate
governance codes. ESRS 1 paragraph 119 allows an undertaking to incorporate in the sustainability
statement information prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement of ESRS, including a specific
datapoint prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement by reference to the corporate governance
statement (if not part of the management report), provided that the conditions in paragraph 120
are met.
Answer
As defined in Annex II of ESRS, administrative, management and supervisory bodies as a collective
have the highest decision-making authority. The governance bodies which are covered under this
definition can vary from one jurisdiction to another. This is because some jurisdictions have
different bodies for management and supervision, respectively, whereas others have one unique
body carrying out both roles.
‘Senior executive management’ must be understood as a higher position than a ‘management-
level position’.
In the description of their governance bodies and management, undertakings need to ensure
consistency between the sustainability statement and the corporate governance statement as
well as other corporate communications in general.
Question ID 728 – Representation of employees and other workers
Release date
July 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 88 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question asked
Is the ‘representation of employees and other workers’ in ESRS 2 paragraph 21 (b) asking which
of the board members is also an employee, or is it about whether there are workers’
representatives in the board?
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 paragraph 21 (b)
Key terms
Representation of employees and other workers
Background
ESRS 2 paragraph 21 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the following information about the
composition and diversity of the members of the undertaking’s administrative, management and
supervisory bodies:…
(b) representation of employees and other workers …’.
GRI is also a useful source of complementary guidance since it also requires describing the
composition of the highest governance body and its committees. However, ESRS paragraph 21 (b)
requires reporting the representation of employees and other workers, whereas GRI 2-9-c-viii
requires reporting stakeholder representation, which includes but is not limited to employees and
other workers.
Answer
The undertaking shall disclose whether there are representatives of the undertaking’s employees
and other workers in their administrative, management and supervisory bodies. This is because
ESRS 2 paragraph 21 (b) requires information on the ‘representation of employees and other
workers’. These representatives are selected in line with EU / national legislation on worker
representation in administrative, management and supervisory bodies, i.e. being either elected
directly by the workforce or appointed by workers’ representative bodies, e.g. trade unions, works
councils or European works councils.
Question ID 781 – General meeting
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Is the general meeting to be considered as an ‘administrative, management and supervisory
body’? The general meeting is usually a company’s highest decision-making body. However, it
seems that the general meeting is not mentioned once in any of EFRAG’s materials, such as Q&As,
and the focus is on the Board of Directors, its committees and the CEO.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 89 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 GOV-1
Key terms
Categorisation of the general meeting
Background
Annex II of the ESRS defines ‘administrative, management and supervisory bodies’ as follows: ‘The
governance bodies with the highest decision-making authority in the undertaking including its
committees. If in the governance structure there are no members of the administrative,
management or supervisory bodies of the undertaking, the CEO, and if such function exists, the
deputy CEO, should be included. In some jurisdictions, governance systems consist of two tiers,
where supervision and management are separated. In such cases, both tiers are included under
the definition of administrative, management and supervisory bodies.’
In contrast, the general meeting is a mandatory annual meeting in which an undertaking’s
shareholders or owners exercise their decision-making powers. Matters within the decision-
making power of the general meetings include the matters provided for in law or the articles of
association, such as the remuneration and appointment of directors and auditors, adoption of the
company’s financial statements, distribution of assets, discharge from liability of the executives,
amendments to the articles of association and decisions relating to the company’s shares or share
capital.
The Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on the
annual financial statements, consolidated financial statements and related reports of certain
types of undertakings makes a clear distinction between the general meeting (or shareholder
meeting) and the administrative, management and supervisory bodies and their committees.
Additionally, national Corporate Governance Codes make a similar distinction and provide
guidance and recommendations regarding best practices for both the general meeting and the
administrative, management and supervisory bodies.
Answer
No, the general meeting should not be considered an ‘administrative, management and
supervisory body’. It is a separate governance body with specific powers attributed to
shareholders or owners. The general meeting is not addressed by ESRS but instead by the
Accounting Directive using, however, the term ‘shareholder meeting’ with respect to the
Corporate Governance Statement and by the national Corporate Governance Codes.
Question ID 1072 – ESRS 2 GOV-1 – ESG expertise of governance
bodies
Release date
November 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 90 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question asked
How can one document ESG knowledge and the competences of the management board and
supervisory board? Should it be one person from the Management Board or the Supervisory
Board who has these features or else the entire Management Board and the entire Supervisory
Board? Can it be an attorney? Should it be a course, training or, for example, studies?
ESRS Reference
ESRS 2 paragraphs 19, 20, 23 and AR 5
Key terms
Expertise and skills, sustainability related; administrative, management and supervisory bodies
Background
ESRS 2 paragraph 19 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the composition of the administrative,
management and supervisory bodies, their roles and responsibilities and access to expertise and
skills with regard to sustainability matters.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 20 states: ‘The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an
understanding of: …
(c) the expertise and skills of its administrative, management and supervisory bodies on
sustainability matters or access to such expertise and skills.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 23 states: ‘The disclosure shall include a description of how the administrative,
management and supervisory bodies determine whether appropriate skills and expertise are
available or will be developed to oversee sustainability matters, including:
(a) the sustainability-related expertise that the bodies, as a whole, either directly possess or
can leverage, for example through access to experts or training; and
(b) how those skills and expertise relate to the undertaking’s material impacts, risks and
opportunities.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 20 states: ‘The description of the level of expertise or access to expertise of the
administrative, management and supervisory bodies may be substantiated by illustrating the
composition of the bodies, including members on whom these bodies rely for expertise to oversee
sustainability matters, and how they leverage that expertise as a body. In the description, the
undertaking shall consider how the expertise and skills are relevant to the undertaking’s material
impacts, risks and opportunities and whether the bodies and/or its members have access to other
sources of expertise, such as specific experts and training and other educational initiatives to
update and develop sustainability-related expertise within these bodies.’
ESRS 2 paragraph AR 5 states: ‘The description of the level of expertise or access to expertise of
the administrative, management and supervisory bodies may be substantiated by illustrating the
composition of the bodies, including members on whom these bodies rely for expertise to oversee
sustainability matters, and how they leverage that expertise as a body. In the description, the
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 91 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
undertaking shall consider how the expertise and skills are relevant to the undertaking’s material
impacts, risks and opportunities and whether the bodies and/or its members have access to other
sources of expertise, such as specific experts and training and other educational initiatives to
update and develop sustainability-related expertise within these bodies.’
Answer
ESRS do not prescribe behaviour but require disclosure.
The sustainability-related expertise and skills could be with one person or with more than that
from the administrative, management and supervisory bodies or substantiated in another kind of
form. ESRS 2 paragraph AR 5 provides further guidance in that respect.
EESRS 2 GOV-3 Integration of sustainability-related performance in
incentive schemes
Question ID 1013 – Potential discrepancy in variable remuneration
between ESRS 2 and ESRS E1
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
(1) Is the ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement GOV-3 on ‘the proportion of variable remuneration
dependent on sustainability-related targets and/or impacts’ (ESRS 2 paragraph 29 (d))
calculated as a percentage of:
(a) variable remuneration;
(b) fixed remuneration; or
(c) total remuneration (fixed and variable)?
(2) Is the percentage to be disclosed under ESRS E1 Disclosure requirement related to ESRS 2
GOV-3 Integration of sustainability-related performance in incentive schemes based on the
same denominator as under question (1) above?
ESRS Reference
ESRS 2 paragraph 29 (d) and ESRS E1 paragraph 13
Key terms
Remuneration; annual total remuneration
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 92 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
The question received, ‘In the E1.GOV-3_02 requirement, could you please specify whether the
required percentage of current remuneration related to sustainability shall be calculated: (i) as a
percentage of variable remuneration, (ii) as a percentage of fixed remuneration or (iii) as a
percentage of total remuneration (fixed plus variable)?’, has been modified to the above question
for clarity. The submitter provided the following answer to the question: ‘Drawing a parallel
between ESRS E1.GOV-3_02 and ESRS 2 GOV-3_05, I would assume that the percentage of current
remuneration related to sustainability being asked shall be calculated as a percentage of variable
remuneration.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 29 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose: …
(d) the proportion of variable remuneration dependent on sustainability-related targets
and/or impacts …’.
ESRS E1 paragraph 13 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose … the percentage of remuneration
recognised in the current period that is linked to climate-related considerations …’.
Annual total remuneration is defined in Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms: ‘Annual total
remuneration to own workforce includes salary, bonus, stock awards, option awards, non-equity
incentive plan compensation, change in pension value, and nonqualified deferred compensation
earnings provided over the course of a year.’
Answer
(1) Is the ESRS 1 Disclosure Requirement GOV-3 on ‘the proportion of variable remuneration
dependent on sustainability-related targets and/or impacts’ (ESRS 2 paragraph 29(d))
calculated:
(a) as a percentage of variable remuneration;
(b) as a percentage of fixed remuneration; or
(c) as a percentage of total remuneration (fixed and variable)?
The ESRS 2 paragraph 29(d) metric shall be calculated as (a) a percentage of variable
remuneration.
ESRS 2 paragraph 29(d) requires the ‘proportion of variable remuneration dependent on
sustainability-related targets and/or impacts’ to be disclosed. According to this wording, the
numerator is the proportion of the variable remuneration dependent on sustainability-related
targets and/or impacts, and the denominator is the variable remuneration.
Though not explicitly stated in ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement GOV-3 (paragraph 29(d)), it shall be
assumed that remuneration is the amount recognised in the current period, i.e. the amount
recognised as an expense (i.e. regardless of whether or not it is paid out) under the applicable
accounting GAAP in the financial statements. This shall be done considering connectivity with
financial statements in line with the elements listed in the definition of ‘annual total
remuneration’ in Annex II and consistent with ESRS E1 paragraph 13, which explicitly refers to the
‘remuneration recognised’.
(2) Is the percentage to be disclosed under ESRS E1 Disclosure requirement related to ESRS 2
GOV-3 Integration of sustainability-related performance in incentive schemes based on
the same denominator as under question (1) above?
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 93 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
No, it is not. The ESRS E1 paragraph 13 metric shall be calculated as a percentage of total
remuneration.
ESRS E1 paragraph 13 requires the ‘percentage of remuneration recognised’ to be disclosed. The
phrase used requires that the denominator be the remuneration recognised, i.e. the total of fixed
and variable remuneration recognised, and that the numerator be the ‘remuneration
recognised … that is linked to climate-related considerations’.
To note: There is no reason why the term ‘remuneration’ as used in both ESRS 1 paragraph 29 and
ESRS E1 paragraph 13 in respect of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies is not
to be read as being consistent with the definition of ‘annual total remuneration’, as defined in
Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms in respect of own workforce.
ESRS 2 SBM-1 Strategy, business model and value chain
Question ID 39 – SBM-1 sector breakdown and phase-in
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
What are the ‘ESRS sectors’ mentioned under the ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement SBM-1 in
paragraph 40 (b)?
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 paragraph 40; ESRS 1 paragraph 137 and Appendix C: List of phased-in Disclosure
Requirements
Key terms
Sector-breakdown
Background
ESRS 2 paragraph 40 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the following information about the
key elements of its general strategy that relate to or affect sustainability matters: . . . (b) a
breakdown of total revenue, as included in its financial statements, by significant ESRS sectors.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 137 states: ‘Appendix C List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements in this
Standard sets phase-in provisions for the Disclosure Requirements or datapoints of Disclosure
Requirements in ESRS that may be omitted or that are not applicable in the first year(s) of
preparation of the sustainability statement under the ESRS.’
ESRS 1 Appendix C states: ‘The undertaking shall report the information prescribed by ESRS 2 SBM-
1 paragraph 40 (b) (breakdown of total revenue by significant ESRS sector) and 40 (c) (list of
additional significant ESRS sectors) starting from the application date specified in a Commission
Delegated Act to be adopted pursuant to article 29b(1) third subparagraph point (ii), of Directive
2013/34/EU.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 94 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
The Accounting Directive Article 29b(1) third subparagraph point (ii) of Directive 2013/34/EU
states: ‘In the delegated acts referred to in the first subparagraph the Commission shall, by 30
June 2024, specify: . . . (ii) information that undertakings are to report that is specific to the sector
in which they operate.’
Answer
The ESRS Sectors will be defined in a future delegated act, following the issuance of a draft ESRS
to be prepared by EFRAG.
As the European Commission has not adopted a delegated act specifying the list of ESRS sectors,
undertakings are not required to disclose the information referred to in ESRS 2 paragraph 40 (b).
Question ID 293 - Relationship of strategy and policy
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
What is developed first: the strategy or the policy related to sustainability matters?
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement SBM-1 and MDR-P of ESRS 2; Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of
Terms definition of policies
Key terms
Strategy, policy
Background
ESRS 2 paragraph 38 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the elements of its strategy that relate
to or impact sustainability matters, its business model and its value chain.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 63 states: ‘The undertaking shall apply the minimum disclosure requirements
defined in this provision when it discloses the policies it has in place with regard to each
sustainability matter identified as material.’
A policy according to the Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms is ‘A set or framework of
general objectives and management principles that the undertaking uses for decision-making. A
policy implements the undertaking’s strategy or management decisions related to a material
sustainability matter.’
Answer
While ESRS set disclosure requirements, they do not prescribe behavioural obligations in respect
to strategy and policies.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 95 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
The development of a strategy or policy related to sustainability matters is determined by the
undertaking’s governance bodies.
Question ID 395 – Revenue/net revenue
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
What does net revenue mean? How is it calculated?
ESRS reference
All Disclosure Requirements require a breakdown of revenue or an intensity metric based on net
revenue, for example, ESRS 2 Disclosure requirement SBM-1 Strategy, business model and value
chain paragraph 40 (b); ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-5 Energy consumption and mix
paragraph 40; ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6 Gross scopes 1,2,3 and Total GHG emissions
paragraph 53; and ESRS Disclosure requirement E3-4 Water consumption paragraph 29.
Key terms
Revenue, net revenue, net turnover
Background
ESRS use the terms ‘revenue’, ‘total revenue’ and ‘net revenue’ as synonyms. ESRS 2 refers to
‘revenue’ or ‘total revenue’ (see ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement SBM-1 – Strategy, business model
and value chain) whereas ESRS E1 and the other environmental ESRS refer mostly to ‘net
revenue’.
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 36 (e) states: ‘When preparing the information on energy intensity required
under paragraph 40, the undertaking shall calculate the net revenue in line with the accounting
standards’ requirements applicable for the financial statements, i.e., IFRS 15 Revenue from
Contracts with Customers or local GAAP requirements.’
ESRS do not use the term ‘net turnover’ as used by the Accounting Directive (Directive
2013/34/EU Article 2 (5)) The Accounting Directive defines ‘net turnover’ as the amounts derived
from the sale of products and the provision of services after deducting sales rebates and value
added tax and other taxes directly linked to turnover; however, for insurance undertakings
referred to in point (a) of the first subparagraph of Article 1 (3) of this Directive, ‘net turnover’
shall be defined in accordance with Article 35 and point 2 of Article 66 of Council Directive
91/674/EEC; for credit institutions referred to in point (b) of the first subparagraph of Article 1
(3) of this Directive, ‘net turnover’ shall be defined in accordance with point (c) of Article 43 (2)
of Council Directive 86/635/EEC; and for undertakings falling under the scope of Article 40a(1) of
this Directive, ‘net turnover’ means the revenue as defined by or within the meaning of the
financial reporting framework on the basis of which the financial statements of the undertaking
are prepared’.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 96 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
The Delegated Act (EU) 2021/2178 specifying Article 8 of the Taxonomy Directive related to
environmental taxonomy disclosures also uses the term ‘net turnover’ (see the supporting
material below).
Answer
The terms ‘revenue’, ‘total revenue’ and ‘net revenue’ are to be understood as the amounts
presented in the income statement of the undertaking’s financial statements in accordance with
the applicable legislation and/or accounting standards, i.e. IAS 1 paragraph 82 (a)2 – if IFRS
Standards are applied – or generally accepted national accounting principles (national GAAP).
See also Question ID 482 – Breakdown of total revenue – financial institutions.
Supporting material
Delegated Act (EU) 2021/2178 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2020/852 specifying the content
to be disclosed and its presentation by undertakings subject to Articles 19a or 29a of Directive
2013/34/EU, concerning environmentally sustainable economic activities and specifying the
methodology to comply with that disclosure obligation, Annex I paragraph 1.1.1 (Delegated Act
specifying article 8 of the Taxonomy Directive), states: ‘… net turnover (denominator) as defined
in Article 2, point (5), of Directive 2013/34/EU … shall cover the revenue recognised pursuant to
International Accounting Standard (IAS) 1, paragraph 82 (a), as adopted by Commission
Regulation (EC) 1126/20081.’
Question ID 482 – Breakdown of total revenue – financial institutions
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
1. How is the total revenue of a credit institution defined?
2. How is it divided into ESRS sectors? Is it the sector ‘credit institution’ or the sectors for
the business portfolio, i.e., the sectors of the financed portfolio?
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 paragraph 40
Key terms
Breakdown of total revenue; financial institutions
2 Or any future standard superseding IAS 1.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 97 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
The submitter asked the following question, which was amended as stated above to align it with
the wording of ESRS 2 paragraph 40: ‘How is total income of a credit institution defined and how
is it divided into ESRS sectors? Is it the sector ‘credit institution’ or the sectors for the business
portfolio, i.e., the sectors of the financed portfolio?’
ESRS 2 paragraph 40 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the following information about the
key elements of its general strategy that relate to or affect sustainability matters … (b) a
breakdown of total revenue, as included in its financial statements, by significant ESRS sectors.’
ESRS 2 paragraph AR 12 states: ‘To provide the information on sectors required by paragraph 40,
the undertaking shall map its significant activities in accordance with ESRS sectors. If a code for a
subsector does not exist, the caption “others” shall be used.’
ESRS do not use the term ‘net turnover’ as used by the Accounting Directive (Directive
2013/34/EU Article 2 (5)). The Accounting Directive defines ‘net turnover’ (Directive 2013/34/EU
Article 2 (5)): ‘net turnover’ means the amounts derived from the sale of products and the
provision of services after deducting sales rebates and value added tax and other taxes directly
linked to turnover; however, for insurance undertakings referred to in point (a) of the first
subparagraph of Article 1 (3) of this Directive, ‘net turnover’ shall be defined in accordance with
Article 35 and point 2 of Article 66 of Council Directive 91/674/EEC; for credit institutions referred
to in point (b) of the first subparagraph of Article 1 (3) of this Directive, ‘net turnover’ shall be
defined in accordance with point (c) of Article 43 (2) of Council Directive 86/635/EEC; …’
Council Directive 86/635/EEC of December 1991 on the annual accounts and consolidated
accounts of banks and other financial institutions, Article 43 (2) point (c), states: ‘The information
referred to in the first two indents of Article 9 (2) of Directive 83/349/EEC, namely … [that] the
net turnover shall be replaced by … the sum of items … B 1, B 2, B 3, B 4 and B 7 in Article 28 of
this Directive.’
Council Directive 86/635/EEC Article 28 states:
‘B. Income
(a) Interest receivable and similar income, showing separately that arising from fixed-income
securities
(b) Income from securities:
i. Income from shares and other variable-yield securities
ii. Income from participating interests
iii. Income from shares in affiliated undertakings
(c) Commissions receivable
(d) Net profit on financial operations
(a) (…)
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 98 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(b) 7. Other operating income …’
Answer
(1) How is total revenue of a credit institution defined?
Total revenue of a credit institution, according to ESRS 2 paragraph 40, is a proxy for ‘net turnover’
as defined in the Accounting Directive (Directive 2013/34/EU) Article 2 (5).
ESRS use the terms ‘revenue’, ‘total revenue’ and ‘net revenue’ as synonyms. ESRS 2 refers to
‘revenue’ or ‘total revenue’ (see ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement SBM-1 – Strategy, business model
and value chain) whereas ESRS E1 and the other environmental ESRS refer mostly to ‘net
revenue’. The three terms are referred to in ESRS in a more generic way as a proxy for ‘net
turnover’ as defined by the Accounting Directive by considering the revenue as defined by the
financial reporting framework applicable to the financial statements of the undertaking,
acknowledging in whatever way possible revenues that are defined under the applicable GAAP.
(2) How is it divided into ESRS sectors? Is it the sector ‘credit institution’ or the sectors for
the business portfolio, i.e., the sectors of the financed portfolio?
Credit institutions should not refer to the sectors of the financed portfolio for the purposes of
ESRS 2 paragraph 40. For presenting the revenue breakdown by ESRS sector, they should refer to
the sectors in which they directly operate, not the sectors in which their clients operate.
See also Question ID 395 Revenue / net revenue and Question ID 39 SBM-1 Sector breakdown and
phase-in.
Question ID 644 – Limits of fossil fuel sector
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Which activities are in the scope of the fossil fuel sector in paragraph 40 of ESRS 2?
(1) Is the petrochemical sector included, like ethylene production? Many industrial sectors
are using products derived from oil or Liquid Natural Gas (LNG) as an input in the
production of a chemical product. Will they all be part of the fossil fuel sector? What are
the limits?
(2) Should an Engineering, Procurement and Construction contractor of an LNG plant include
its Engineering, Procurement and Construction revenues under this caption?
ESRS Reference
ESRS 2 paragraph 40(d)(i)
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 99 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Key terms
Fossil fuel
Background
The question asked: ‘What are the limits of the fossil fuel sector?
(1) Is the petrochemical sector included, like ethylene production? Many industrial sectors
are using products derived from oil or LNG as an input in the production of a chemical
product. Will they all be part of the fossil fuel sector? What are the limits?
(2) Should an Engineering, Procurement and Construction contractor of a Liquid Natural Gas
plant include its Engineering, Procurement and Construction revenues under this
caption?’
was reworded to the above question for clarity.
ESRS 2 paragraph 40 (d) states: ‘where applicable, a statement indicating, together with the
related revenues, that the undertaking is active in:
(i) the fossil fuel (coal, oil and gas) sector, (i.e. it derives revenues from exploration, mining,
extraction, production, processing, storage, refining or distribution, including
transportation, storage and trade, of fossil fuels as defined in Article 2, point (62), of
Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and the Council), including a
disaggregation of revenues derived from coal, from oil and from gas, as well as the
revenues derived from Taxonomy-aligned economic activities related to fossil gas as
required under Article 8(7)(a) of Commission Delegated Regulation 2021/2178 …’.
Annex II defines ‘fossil fuel’ as non-renewable carbon-based energy sources such as solid fuels,
natural gas and oil. This definition corresponds to Article 2, point (62), of Regulation (EU)
2018/1999 of the European Parliament and the Council.
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 defines ‘companies active in the fossil fuel
sector’ as companies that derive any revenues from exploration, mining, extraction, production,
processing, storage, refining or distribution, including transportation, storge and trade of fossil
fuels as defined in Article 2, point (62), of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament
and the Council.
Answer
Whether the undertaking is active in the fossil fuel sector is based on ESRS 2 paragraph 40 (d)(i).
Fossil fuels are understood as non-renewable carbon-based energy sources such as solid fuels,
natural gas and oil.
(1) Is petrochemical sector included, like ethylene production? Many industrial sectors are
using products derived from oil or LNG as an input in the production of a chemical product.
Will they all be part of the fossil fuel sector? What are the limits?
The petrochemical activities, such as ethylene production, can be understood as a part of the
fossil fuel sector provided that they fulfil the definition of (EU) 2022/1288, as for example the
ethylene production that occurs in refinery cracker to produce gasoline. Ethylene production in a
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 100 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
cracker dedicated to producing ethylene and other petroleum gases as feedstocks for a chemical
plant or chemical industrial park, where these serve as intermediates for producing polymers and
industrial chemicals rather than being used as an energy source, would not be understood as a
part of the fossil fuel sector so long as it does not fulfil the definition of (EU) 2022/1288.
(2) Should an Engineering, Procurement and Construction contractor of an LNG plant include its
EPC revenues under this caption?
An EPC (Engineering, Procurement and Construction) contractor of an LNG plant providing
services such as the ones described in NACE 71.12 ‘Engineering activities and related technical
consultancy’ or NACE division 42 ‘Civil engineering’, which includes construction of industrial
facilities, e.g. refineries, is considered active in fossil fuels sector provided that it derives any
revenues from the activities described in the definition of (EU) 2022/1288.
Question ID 905 – Manufacture of chemicals/pesticides and other
agrochemical products
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
There is a reference to Division 20.2 of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006 and I wonder
whether you mean Division 20 Group 20.2, which is ‘Manufacture of pesticides and other
agrochemical products’.
ESRS Reference
ESRS 2 paragraph 40(d)(ii)
Key terms
Pesticides; chemicals; agrochemical products
Background
ESRS 2 paragraph 40 states: ’The undertaking shall disclose the following information about the
key elements of its general strategy that relate to or affect sustainability matters …
(a) where applicable, a statement indicating, together with the related revenues, that the
undertaking is active in …
(ii) chemicals production, i.e. activities that fall under the Division 20.2 of Annex I to
Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006 …’
Answer
Yes, the correct reference is to Division 20 Group 20.2 of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006,
which is ‘Manufacture of pesticides and other agrochemical products’.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 101 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Supporting material
Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006
ESRS 2 SBM 3 Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their
interaction with strategy and business model
Question ID 67 - ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement SBM-3
vocabulary/grammar used
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Can you provide a more detailed explanation on how the expression ‘as opposed to’ is to be
interpreted in the context of the Disclosure Requirement SBM-3 of ESRS 2?
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 paragraph 48 (h)
Key terms
n/a
Background
According to ESRS 2 paragraph 48 (h), the undertaking shall disclose a specification of those
impacts, risks and opportunities that are covered by ESRS Disclosure Requirements as opposed to
those covered by the undertaking using additional entity-specific disclosures.
Answer
ESRS 1 chapter 1.1 describes the three categories of ESRS standards (i.e., cross-cutting, topical and
sector-specific). ESRS 1 paragraph 11 explains the entity-specific disclosures that complement the
disclosures laid out in these three categories of ESRS standards.
In addition, ESRS 1 paragraphs AR1 to AR5 provide further guidance on the requirements that
entity-specific disclosures shall fulfil.
ESRS 2 paragraph 48 (h) requires undertakings to separately distinguish those material impacts,
risks and opportunities whose disclosures follow the ESRS standards (i.e., standardised
disclosures) from those that have been specifically designed by the undertaking according to the
provision in ESRS 1 paragraph 11 and its related Application Requirements (i.e., entity-specific
disclosures).
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 102 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question ID 935 – Financial effects – current versus anticipated
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
What is the difference between current financial effects in ESRS 2 paragraph 48 (d) and anticipated
short-term effects in ESRS 2 paragraph 48 (e)?
ESRS Reference
ESRS 2 paragraph 48
Key terms
Financial effects; current financial effects; anticipated financial effects
Background
The submitter provided the following background for the question: ‘According to ESRS 1
Section 6.4 paragraph 77, the short-term time horizon is defined as the reporting period
(which we interpret as the current reporting period), and the medium-term horizon starts
after that reporting period up to five years. Is the next annual reporting period included in the
short-term horizon as defined by ESRS 1.77.b, and is that then the definition of anticipated
short-term effects, or is it included in the medium-term horizon? What would be the short-
term anticipated effects in that case? (In the French translation, short-term time horizon is
defined as the ‘période de référence’, which in paragraph 75 is the equivalent of the ‘base
year’ – this adds to the confusion.)’
ESRS 2 paragraph 48 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose …
(d) the current financial effects of the undertaking’s material risks and opportunities on its
financial position, financial performance and cash flows and the material risks and
opportunities for which there is a significant risk of a material adjustment within the next
annual reporting period to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities reported in the
related financial statements; and
(e) the anticipated financial effects of the undertaking’s material risks and opportunities on
its financial position, financial performance and cash flows over the short-, medium- and
long-term, including the reasonably expected time horizons for those effects. This shall
include how the undertaking expects its financial position, financial performance and cash
flows to change over the short-, medium- and long-term, given its strategy to manage
risks and opportunities, taking into consideration:
(i) its investment and disposal plans (for example, capital expenditure, major
acquisitions and divestments, joint ventures, business transformation,
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 103 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
innovation, new business areas and asset retirements), including plans the
undertaking is not contractually committed to; and
(ii) its planned sources of funding to implement its strategy. …’.
Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms defines:
(a) ‘financial effects’ as ‘Effects from risks and opportunities that affect the undertaking’s
financial position, financial performance and cash flows over the short-, medium- or long-
term’;
(b) ‘current financial effects’ as ‘Financial effects for the current reporting period that are
recognised in the primary financial statements’; and
(c) ‘anticipated financial effects’ as ‘Financial effects that do not meet the recognition criteria
for inclusion in the financial statement line items in the reporting period and that are not
captured by the current financial effects’.
ESRS 1 Appendix C states in its phase-in provisions regarding ESRS 2 paragraph 48 (e), ‘The
undertaking may omit the information prescribed by ESRS 2 SBM-3 paragraph 48 (e) (anticipated
financial effects) for the first year of preparation of its sustainability statement. The undertaking
may comply with ESRS 2 SBM-3 paragraph 48 (e) by reporting only qualitative disclosures for the
first three years of preparation of its sustainability statement, if it is impracticable to prepare
quantitative disclosures.’
Answer
Current financial effects and anticipated financial effects are two different concepts.
Current financial effects are defined as ‘financial effects for the current reporting period that are
recognised in the primary financial statements’. Anticipated financial effects are defined as
‘financial effects that do not meet the recognition criteria for inclusion in the financial statement
line items in the reporting period and that are not captured by the current financial effects’.
Anticipated financial effects includes the financial effects that are not ‘current financial effects’.
The distinguishing characteristic is whether the financial effect has already been recognised in the
financial statements based on the recognition criteria for inclusion in the primary financial
statements or not. Accordingly, the current financial effect has already been recognised at or
before the reporting date, whereas the anticipated effect might occur thereafter, be it in the short-
(within the reporting period, after the balance-sheet date), medium- or long-term.
For example, an impairment charge recognised in the current reporting period in accordance with
IAS 36 Impairment of assets is a current financial effect whereas a disclosure in accordance with
IAS 36 paragraph 134 (f), requiring the disclosure of a potential impairment based on a
‘reasonable possible change in key assumptions’, is an anticipated financial effect.
The second part of ESRS 2 paragraph 48 (d) (second datapoint) requires the disclosure of ‘… the
material risks and opportunities for which there is a significant risk of a material adjustment within
the next annual reporting period to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities reported in the
related financial statements’. This datapoint does not qualify as current financial effects but as
anticipated financial effects for which there is a significant risk of a material adjustment within
the next annual reporting period.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 104 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
In this sense, there is an overlap as the datapoint ‘adjustment within the next annual reporting
period’ is also part of the anticipated financial effects to be reported under ESRS 2 paragraph
48 (e).
The undertaking may incorporate disclosures using cross-references to the respective parts in the
financial statements to avoid repetitions. As a reminder in the context of financial effects,
undertakings shall include in their sustainability statement, based on thresholds of materiality,
references to the financial statements for monetary amounts or other quantitative data (see ESRS
1 paragraphs 124 and 125) – respectively, for significant data, assumptions, and qualitative
information (see ESRS 1 paragraphs 126 to 128 and Chapter 9.2 Connected information and
connectivity with financial statements). Incorporation by reference may be considered (see ESRS
1 Chapter 9.1 Incorporation by reference).
ESRS 2 IRO-1 Description of the processes to identify and assess material
impacts, risks and opportunities
Question ID 517 – Disclosure of thresholds
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
(1) How is threshold-setting to be documented?
(2) How is one to disclose on threshold-setting? Is it enough to just generally explain how the
thresholds for the materiality assessment are set, or is it necessary to explain each
threshold separately?
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 paragraph 59 (IRO-2) and 53 (c) ii (IRO-1)
Key terms
Disclosure of thresholds
Background
The question received, ‘How to document on setting thresholds? Is it enough to just generally
explain how the thresholds for the materiality assessment are set or is it necessary to explain each
threshold separately?’ was reworded for the sake of clarity into the question above.
ESRS 2 paragraph 53 (b) and (c) states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose: …
(b) an overview of the process to identify, assess, prioritise and monitor the undertaking’s
potential and actual impacts on people and the environment, informed by the
undertaking’s due diligence process, including an explanation of whether and how the
process:
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 105 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
…
(iv) prioritises negative impacts based on their relative severity and likelihood (see
ESRS 1 section 3.4 Impact materiality) and, if applicable, positive impacts on their
relative scale, scope and likelihood, and determines which sustainability matters
are material for reporting purposes, including the qualitative or quantitative
thresholds and other criteria used as prescribed by ESRS 1 section 3.4 Impact
materiality;
(c) an overview of the process used to identify, assess, prioritise and monitor risks and
opportunities that have or may have financial effects. The disclosure shall include:
…
(ii) how the undertaking assesses the likelihood, magnitude and nature of effects of
the identified risks and opportunities (such as the qualitative or quantitative
thresholds and other criteria used as prescribed by ESRS 1 section 3.3 Financial
materiality) …’
ESRS 2 paragraph 59 states: ‘The undertaking shall provide an explanation of how it has
determined the material information to be disclosed in relation to the impacts, risks and
opportunities that it has assessed to be material, including the use of thresholds and/or how it
has implemented the criteria in ESRS 1 section 3.2 Material matters and materiality of
information.’
Answer
(1) How is threshold-setting to be documented?
ESRS do not set behavioural requirements. As explained in IG 1 Materiality Assessment FAQ 12
Should the materiality assessment be documented/evidenced? the ESRS do not prescribe specific
documentation. However, it is reasonable to expect that a certain level of documentation will
need to be produced. This will probably be used for internal control purposes and requested by
the assurance providers of the undertaking’s sustainability statement.
(2) How is one to disclose on threshold-setting? Is it enough to just generally explain how
the thresholds for the materiality assessment are set, or is it necessary to explain each
threshold separately?
Disclosing or explaining each threshold separately is not required in all circumstances. ESRS 2
requires disclosing an overview of the process to identify, assess, prioritise and monitor:
(a) impacts … including an explanation of whether and how the process … determines which
sustainability matters are material … including the qualitative or quantitative thresholds
and other criteria … and
(b) risks and opportunities … including how the undertaking assesses … risks and
opportunities such as the qualitative or quantitative thresholds and other criteria …’
Depending on its specific facts and circumstances, the description and disclosure of thresholds
may be more or less granular. Information about thresholds, as well as information about the
materiality process in general and its components, may be aggregated when this is compatible
with paragraphs 54 to 57 of ESRS 1.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 106 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS 2 IRO-2 Disclosure Requirements in ESRS covered by the undertaking’s
sustainability statement
Question ID 335 - Applicability of EU data points – Appendix B
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Are ESRS 2 Appendix B datapoints (other EU legislation) applicable for all undertakings or for
financial institutions only?
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 Appendix B; ESRS 1 chapter 10.2, paragraphs 35 and 133
Key terms
ESRS 2 Appendix B (other EU legislation); EU data-points
Background
The question initially received by EFRAG from the submitter was referring to ESRS 1 chapter 10.2
paragraph 133 and read as follows: ‘What is the rationale for making the exception to the
transitional provision for datapoints that have their origin in certain EU legislation (Appendix B of
ESRS 2) applying to a very specific set of companies (e.g., financial institutions)? Why not make a
separate list of datapoint exceptions with an explanation of why these datapoints are an
exception?’ As similar questions related to ‘other EU legislation datapoints’ have been received
by EFRAG, the question answered in this explanation was modified to be more generally
applicable as stated above.
ESRS 1 paragraph 133 states: ‘For the first 3 years of its sustainability reporting under the ESRS, in
order to take account of the difficulties that undertakings may encounter in gathering information
from actors throughout their value chain and in order to limit the burden for SMEs in the value
chain: …
(b) when disclosing metrics, the undertaking is not required to include upstream and
downstream value chain information, except for datapoints derived from other EU
legislation, as listed in ESRS 2 Appendix B.’
ESRS 2 Appendix B includes the list of datapoints in cross-cutting and topical standards that derive
from other EU legislation. These datapoints provide information from all undertakings subject to
ESRS for financial institutions to support them in financing the transition according to the ‘green
deal.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 35 states: ‘If the undertaking omits the information prescribed by a datapoint
that derives from other EU legislation listed in Appendix B of ESRS 2, it shall explicitly state that
the information in question is “not material”.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 107 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS 2 paragraph 56 states: ‘The undertaking shall also include a table of all the datapoints that
derive from other EU legislation as listed in Appendix B of this standard, indicating where they can
be found in the sustainability statement and including those that the undertaking has assessed as
not material, in which case the undertaking shall indicate “Not material” in the table in accordance
with ESRS 1 paragraph 35.’
Answer
Yes, ESRS 2 Appendix B datapoints (other EU legislation) are applicable for all undertakings in the
scope of the CSRD/ESRS.
ESRS do not specify that datapoints listed in Appendix B of ESRS 2 are exclusively applicable to
undertakings in specific sectors, such as financial institutions. This is because these datapoints
provide information from all ESRS-reporters enabling financial institutions to meet their
obligations under the SFDR, thereby assisting them in financing the transition in alignment with
the EU Green Deal, as they are designed to support the availability of information regarding their
investees and clients.
Datapoints that derive from other EU legislation listed in Appendix B of ESRS 2 must be provided
irrespective of the materiality assessment if the corresponding requirement is in ESRS 2 (e.g., ESRS
2 Disclosure Requirement GOV-1, Board gender diversity). If the corresponding requirement is in
the topical standards, they are subject to the materiality assessment.
In all cases, the undertaking should publish a table containing all the information required by other
EU legislations, specifying the page of the sustainability statement where this information is
located or indicating ‘not material’ if the company has deemed it as such, as required by ESRS 2
Disclosure Requirement IRO-2.
Question ID 628 – Content index
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
‘Content index’: How are companies to format this disclosure? Are companies expected to use
reference codes to the DR codes? Is it to be published as a Reference Table/Index or can it be
formatted more narratively in the management reports such as in the TCFD’s?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 8; ESRS 2 IRO-2
Key terms
Content index
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 108 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
ESRS 2 paragraph 56 states: ‘The undertaking shall include a list of the Disclosure Requirements
complied with in preparing the sustainability statement following the outcome of the materiality
assessment (see ESRS 1 chapter 3), including the page numbers and/or paragraphs where the
related disclosures are located in the sustainability statement. This may be presented as a content
index. The undertaking shall also include a table of all the datapoints that derive from other EU
legislation as listed in Appendix B of this Standard, indicating where they can be found in the
sustainability statement and including those that the undertaking has assessed as not material,
in which case the undertaking shall indicate “not material” in the table in accordance with ESRS 1
paragraph 35.’
Answer
The undertaking shall include:
(a) a list of the Disclosure Requirements complied with, including the page numbers and/or
paragraphs where the related disclosures are in the sustainability statement (ESRS 2
paragraph 56). This may be presented as a content index;
(b) a table of all the datapoints that derive from other EU legislation as listed in ESRS 2
Appendix B, indicating where they can be found in the sustainability statement and those
that the undertaking has assessed as not material, in which case the undertaking shall
indicate “not material” in the table in accordance with ESRS 1 paragraph 35.
There is no predefined format for this disclosure or for the content index. To structure the
sustainability statement, inspiration can be drawn from the digital ESRS XBRL Taxonomy.
ESRS 2 Minimum Disclosure Requirement – Actions MDR-A – Actions and
resources in relation to material sustainability matters
Question ID 1056 – MDR-Actions and resources allocated
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
What does ‘resources allocated’ refer to specifically in each ESRS? Does it require at a minimum
the disclosure of which departments or specific teams are in charge and/or the total budget
allocated for that specific topic?
ESRS Reference
ESRS 2 paragraphs 66, 69 and AR 23; ESRS E1 paragraphs 26, 28, 29 and AR 20 to 22; ESRS E2
paragraphs 16, 18, 19 and AR 14; ESRS E3 paragraphs 15, 17 to 19 and AR 21; ESRS E4 paragraphs
25, 27 and AR 18; ESRS E5 paragraphs 17 and 19; ESRS S1 paragraphs 37, 43 and AR 48; ESRS S2
paragraphs 31, 38 and AR 44; ESRS S3 paragraphs 31, 38 and AR 43; ESRS S4 paragraphs 30, 37
and AR 41
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 109 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Key terms
MDR-Actions; resources allocated
Background
ESRS 2 paragraph 66 states: ‘The undertaking shall apply the requirements for the content of
disclosures in this provision when it describes the actions through which it manages each material
sustainability matter, including action plans and resources allocated and/or planned.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 69 states: ‘Where the implementation of an action plan requires significant
operational expenditures (Opex) and/or capital expenditures (Capex), the undertaking shall:
(a) describe the type of current and future financial and other resources allocated to the
action plan, including, if applicable, the relevant terms of sustainable finance instruments,
such as green bonds, social bonds and green loans, the environmental or social objectives,
and whether the ability to implement the actions or action plan depends on specific
preconditions, e.g. granting of financial support or public policy and market
developments;
(b) provide the amount of current financial resources and explain how they relate to the most
relevant amounts presented in the financial statements; and
(c) provide the amount of future financial resources.’
ESRS 2 paragraph AR 23 states: ‘Information on resource allocation may be presented in the form
of a table and broken down between capital expenditure and operating expenditure, and across
the relevant time horizons, and between resources applied in the current reporting year and the
planned allocation of resources over specific time horizons.’
ESRS S1-S4 (e.g. ESRS S1 paragraph AR 48) state: ‘When disclosing the resources allocated to the
management of material impacts, the undertaking may explain which internal functions are
involved in managing the impacts and what types of action they take to address negative and
advance positive impacts.’
Because ESRS E1-E5, S1-S4 have numerous other references to ‘resources allocated’ when
requiring disclosures, they are not replicated in this background section (see the ESRS reference
section).
Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms defines ‘marine resources’ and ‘natural resources’.
Answer
The amount of current and future financial resources shall be disclosed where the implementation
of an action plan requires significant operational expenditures (Opex) and/or capital expenditures
(Capex). The ‘departments or specific teams in charge’, on the other hand, may be disclosed.
The ESRS 2 Minimum Disclosure Requirements (MDR) on actions and resources (ESRS 2
paragraphs 66 to 69) are to be applied together with the Disclosure Requirements, including the
Application Requirements, provided in the relevant topical ESRS.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 110 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
The term ‘resources allocated’ is not specifically defined in ESRS. Based on ESRS 2 paragraph 69,
‘resources allocated’ relates to significant Opex and Capex in terms of ‘financial and other
resources’. Again, whilst ‘other resources’ is not defined, it can still be assumed that human
resources are one major element of ‘other resources’.
The term ‘total budget allocated’ is not used in ESRS. However, the amount of current and future
financial resources shall be disclosed by the undertaking in accordance with ESRS 2 paragraph 69
(b) and (c) when the implementation of an action plan requires significant Opex and/or Capex.
The undertaking may disclose the internal functions involved in managing material impacts in
accordance with ESRS S1-S4 (e.g. ESRS S1 paragraph AR 48); this might include the ‘departments
or specific teams in charge’ when disclosing resources allocated to the management of material
impacts. There is no equivalent voluntary Disclosure Requirement in ESRS E1 to E5.
To note: regarding Minimum Disclosure Requirements on policies (ESRS 2 paragraph 65), ‘The
undertaking shall disclose information about policies adopted to manage material sustainability
matters. This information shall include:
(a) the most senior level in the undertaking’s organisation that is accountable for the
implementation of a policy …’.
ESRS 2 Minimum Disclosure Requirement – Metrics MDR-M – Metrics in
relation to material sustainability matters
Question ID 968 – Ecolabel
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
If a company’s metric is verified by an [EU] Ecolabel, can the [EU] Ecolabel be mentioned as an
external body?
ESRS Reference
ESRS 2 paragraph 77(b)
Key terms
Ecolabel; external body
Background
For information on the ‘EU Ecolabel’, please visit the EU Ecolabel site.
ESRS 2 paragraph 77 states: ‘For each metric, the undertaking shall: …
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 111 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(a) disclose whether the measurement of the metric is validated by an external body other
than the assurance provider and, if so, which body …’.
Answer
Yes, if a company’s metric is verified by an EU Ecolabel, and assuming that the Ecolabel is not an
internal body of the undertaking, the Ecolabel can be mentioned as an external body.
According to ESRS 2 paragraph 77 (b), the undertaking is required to disclose whether the
measurement of the metric is validated by an external body other than the assurance provider
and to specify which body.
ESRS 2 Minimum Disclosure Requirement – Targets MDR-T – Tracking
effectiveness of policies and actions through targets
Question ID 1136 – Targets without policy
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Is MDR-Policy a prerequisite for MDR-Target?
ESRS Reference
Definition of ‘targets’ and ‘policies’ in Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms; ESRS 2 paragraphs
78 to 80
Key terms
Targets; policies
Background
Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms defines ‘targets’ as: ‘Measurable, outcome-oriented and
time-bound goals that the undertaking aims to achieve in relation to material impacts, risks or
opportunities. They may be set voluntarily by the undertaking or derive from legal requirements
on the undertaking.’
Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms defines ‘policies’ as: ‘A set or framework of general
objectives and management principles that the undertaking uses for decision-making. A policy
implements the undertaking’s strategy or management decisions related to a material
sustainability matter. Each policy is under the responsibility of defined person(s), specifies its
perimeter of application, and includes one or more objectives (linked when applicable to
measurable targets). A policy is validated and reviewed following the undertakings’ applicable
governance rules. A policy is implemented through actions or action plans.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 112 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS 2 paragraphs 78 to 80 state:
‘78. The undertaking shall apply the requirements for the content of disclosures in this provision
when it discloses information about the targets it has set with regard to each material
sustainability matter.
79. The objective of this Minimum Disclosure Requirement is to provide for each material
sustainability matter an understanding of:
(a) whether and how the undertaking tracks the effectiveness of its actions to address
material impacts, risks and opportunities, including the metrics it uses to do so;
(b) measurable time-bound outcome-oriented targets set by the undertaking to meet the
policy’s objectives, defined in terms of expected results for people, the environment or
the undertaking regarding material impacts, risks and opportunities;
(c) the overall progress towards the adopted targets over time;
(d) in the case that the undertaking has not set measurable time-bound outcome-oriented
targets, whether and how it nevertheless tracks the effectiveness of its actions to
address material impacts, risks and opportunities and measures the progress in
achieving its policy objectives; and
(e) whether and how stakeholders have been involved in target setting for each material
sustainability matter.
80. The undertaking shall disclose the measurable, outcome-oriented and time-bound targets
on material sustainability matters it has set to assess progress. For each target, the disclosure
shall include the following information …’.
Answer
The Minimum Disclosure Requirement – Policies MDR-P of ESRS 2 Chapter 4.2 is not a prerequisite
for the Minimum Disclosure Requirement – Targets of ESRS 2 Chapter 5.
ESRS stipulate disclosures but do not prescribe behaviour. Therefore, they do not prescribe for
each target set, which the undertaking also has a policy in place for how to reach. Accordingly, an
undertaking might have a target without establishing a policy on how to get there. However, this
may not be efficient: while a target can be set without a policy, there is no clear management
principle, rule or guidance on how to achieve it, making it unlikely to be met.
If the undertaking has a target without a related policy, the description of the relationship of the
target to the policy objectives as required by ESRS 2 paragraph 80 (a) shall make that clear.
To note: Minimum Disclosure Requirements – Actions MDR-A – Actions and resources in relation
to material sustainability matters also mentions the situation when actions are implemented
without a specific policy (see ESRS 2 paragraph 68).
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 113 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Questions related to Environment
ESRS E1 Climate change
ESRS E1 Climate change
ESRS E1 Disclosure requirement related to ESRS 2 GOV-3 Integration of
sustainability related performance in incentive schemes
Question ID 1013 – Potential discrepancy in variable remuneration
between ESRS 2 and ESRS E1
Question ID 1013 – Potential discrepancy in variable remuneration between ESRS 2 and ESRS E1
ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the
processes to identify and assess material climate-related impacts, risks and
opportunities
Question ID 350 – Gross risk
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
ESRS E1 paragraph 20 b(ii) and 20 c(ii) make reference to ‘Gross’ risk, yet ‘Gross Risk’ (or
comparable terms) is not included in the ESRS Glossary (i.e., is not clearly defined). Is it correct to
say that climate risk and scenario analysis/assessments processes should be done on an
inherent/gross (i.e., pre-control/mitigation strategy) risk (not a residual/net risk post-
control/mitigation) basis?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 20 b(ii), and 20 c(ii)
Key Terms
Gross risk; physical risk; transition risk
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph 20 b(ii) states: ‘The undertaking shall describe the process to identify and
assess climate-related impacts, risks and opportunities. This description shall include its process
in relation to: …
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 114 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(a) climate-related physical risks in own operations and along the upstream and downstream
value chain, in particular: …
ii. the assessment of how its assets and business activities may be exposed and are
sensitive to these climate-related hazards, creating gross physical risks for the
undertaking; …
(c) climate-related transition risks and opportunities in own operations and along the
upstream and downstream value chain, in particular: …
ii. the assessment of how its assets and business activities may be exposed to these
climate-related transition events, creating gross transition risks or opportunities
for the undertaking.’
ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement IRO-1 details the processes to identify and assess climate-related
impacts, risks and opportunities. It requires the assessment of gross material risks. This process
allows to respond to ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement SBM-3, which introduces the description of
business resilience in relation to climate change. The actions and resources to mitigate material
risks will lead to residual net risks. The climate risk and scenario analysis/assessments processes
should be done on a gross basis.
Answer
As stated in ESRS E1 paragraph 20, the undertaking shall describe the process to identify and
assess climate-related impacts, risks and opportunities. This assessment refers to gross physical
and transition risks. Gross risks means that the undertaking should not consider the effects of the
actions and resources to mitigate the material risk when assessing it.
When disclosing the information required under ESRS E1 paragraphs 20 (b) and 20 (c), the
undertaking shall explain how it has used climate-related scenario analysis, including a range of
climate scenarios, to inform the identification and assessment of physical risks and transition risks
and opportunities over the short-, medium- and long-term.
The assessment of material climate-related impacts, risks and opportunities is performed looking
at the gross risk, i.e., before any mitigating actions. The same applies to scenario analysis when it
is used to support the identification and materiality assessment of impacts, risks and
opportunities.
When disclosing according to ESRS E1 paragraphs 20 b(ii) and c(ii), consideration should be given
to ESRS 1 paragraph 31 that relevant information is disclosed only on the material risks.
See also IG 1 Materiality Assessment – FAQ 23: Are remediation and mitigation actions considered
in the materiality assessment of environmental impacts? for further explanation.
ESRS E1-4 Targets related to climate change mitigation and adaptation
Question ID 206 - Climate-related targets
Release date
March 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 115 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question asked
Is it an absolute requirement in paragraph 30 that 90-95% of GHG emission reduction needs to be
performed before giving the option to work with GHG Removals?
Key Terms
GHG removal, GHG emission reduction
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 30, 34 and 60; Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms: GHG removal and
storage, and Carbon credit
Background
ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-4 refers to ‘Targets related to climate change mitigation and
adaptation’.
ESRS E1 paragraph 34 (b) states: ‘GHG emission reduction targets shall be disclosed for Scope 1,
2, and 3 GHG emissions, either separately or combined. The undertaking shall specify, in case of
combined GHG emission reduction targets, which GHG emission Scopes (1, 2 and/or 3) are
covered by the target, the share related to each respective GHG emission Scope and which GHGs
are covered. The undertaking shall explain how the consistency of these targets with its GHG
inventory boundaries is ensured (as required by Disclosure Requirement E1-6). The GHG emission
reduction targets shall be gross targets, meaning that the undertaking shall not include GHG
removals, carbon credits or avoided emissions as a means of achieving the GHG emission
reduction targets;’
ESRS E1 paragraph 60 states: ‘In the case where the undertaking discloses a net-zero target in
addition to the gross GHG emission reduction targets in accordance with Disclosure Requirement
E1-4, paragraph 30, it shall explain the scope, methodologies and frameworks applied and how
the residual GHG emissions (after approximately 90-95% of GHG emission reduction with the
possibility for justified sectoral variations in line with a recognised sectoral decarbonisation
pathway) are intended to be neutralised by, for example, GHG removals in its own operations and
upstream and downstream value chain.’
Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms: ‘GHG removal and storage – (anthropogenic) removals
refer to the withdrawal of GHGs from the atmosphere as a result of deliberate human activities.
These include enhancing biological anthropogenic sinks of CO2 and using chemical engineering to
achieve long-term removal and storage. Carbon capture and storage (CCS) from industrial and
energy-related sources, which alone does not remove CO2 from the atmosphere, can remove
atmospheric CO2 if combined with bioenergy production (Bioenergy with Carbon Capture &
Storage – BECCS). Removals can be subject to reversals, which are movements of stored GHG out
of the intended storage that re-enter the atmosphere. For example, if a forest that was grown to
remove a specific amount of CO2 is subject to a wildfire, the emissions captured in the trees are
reversed.’
Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms: ‘Carbon credit – A transferable or tradable instrument
that represents one metric tonne of CO2eq emission reduction or removal issued and verified
according to recognised quality standards.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 116 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Answer
ESRS E1 does not mandate undertakings to work, or prevent them from working, with GHG
removals. While the (extent of) use of carbon removals remains the undertaking’s decision, ESRS
E1 aims at ensuring transparency. It requires to differentiate between:
(a) the established GHG emissions reduction targets (that shall not include carbon removals
per ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-4);
(b) targets related to net-zero (ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-7 paragraph 60, which
requires GHG emission reductions of approximately 90-95%); and
(c) the climate neutrality claims involving carbon credits (ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-
7 paragraph 61).
Undertakings can work with GHG removals before achieving 90-95% GHG emission reductions
near the point of net-zero. If they claim to have set a net-zero target, however, they need to explain
how they expect to neutralise the outstanding residual emissions after a 90-95% of GHG emissions
reduction has been achieved.
Question ID 531 – Base year
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
If the company has an intensity-emission-reduction target already set with a different base year
than the ESRS recommend (e.g. 2021) but no absolute target yet, is it okay to use the same base
year as for the intensity target although it does not follow the ESRS recommendation?
Reference
ESRS E1 paragraph 34(c)(d) and AR 25
Key terms
Base year; intensity-emission target
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph 34 states: ‘If the undertaking has set GHG emission reduction targets, ESRS 2
MDR-T and the following requirements shall apply: …
(c) the undertaking shall disclose its current base year and baseline value, and from 2030
onwards, update the base year for its GHG emission reduction targets after every five-
year period thereafter. The undertaking may disclose the past progress made in meeting
its targets before its current base year provided that this information is consistent with
the requirements of this Standard;
(d) GHG emission reduction targets shall at least include target values for the year 2030
and, if available, for the year 2050. From 2030, target values shall be set after every five-
year period thereafter …’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 117 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 25 states: ‘When disclosing the information required under paragraph 34(c)
on base year and baseline value: …
(b) the baseline value and base year shall not be changed unless significant changes in
either the target or reporting boundary occur. In such a case, the undertaking shall
explain how the new baseline value affects the new target, its achievement and
presentation of progress over time. To foster comparability, when setting new targets,
the undertaking shall select a recent base year that does not precede the first reporting
year of the new target period by longer than 3 years. For example, for 2030 as the target
year and a target period between 2025 and 2030, the base year shall be selected from
the period between 2022 and 2025 …’
Answer
The following situations might arise.
(a) The undertaking has no target.
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 25 (b) does not set a recommendation but a methodological (application)
requirement to set a new target for the base year ‘… that does not precede the first reporting year
of the new target period by longer than three years.’. In other words, the base year must be one
of the last three years in which the undertaking has reliably measured its GHG emissions while
undertaking decarbonization actions.
GHG emission reduction targets shall at least include target values for the year 2030 (ESRS E1
paragraph 34 (d)). For example, for 2030 as the target year and a target period between 2025 and
2030, the base year shall be selected from the period between 2022 and 2025. In accordance with
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 25, to set a target with a baseline figure in 2021, the target would have to
cover the period of 2024 to 2030, with 2024 being the first year for reporting on the new target.
For undertakings with a reduction plan in progress at the time the CSRD comes into force, there
is no need to modify the targets if they meet the requirement of ESRS E1. The plans will be revised
and aligned with 2023 (reporting year) once the reduction period is over.
(b) The undertaking already has a target.
If an undertaking already has GHG emission reduction targets in place which have been publicly
disclosed, these should not be updated for the purposes of CSRD requirements. The target level
and base year can remain unchanged until the target is required to be updated, e.g. due to
significant changes in scope or after 2030. Information on these targets should be reported in line
with CSRD requirements. For its GHG emission reduction target, the undertaking shall disclose in
absolute value the GHG emission reduction target and its current target base year and target
baseline value. If an undertaking’s pre-existing targets are intensity targets, the CSRD
requirements do not require a new absolute target to be set. Rather, they require for each
intensity target an associated absolute target value to be disclosed. This associated absolute value
would be based on the intensity target reduction specified for the pre-existing target.
(c) Case of early achievement.
If an undertaking achieves its target (past target period) earlier than expected, the base year may
be older provided that this old base year meets the ESRS E1-4 requirements.
This question will also be covered in the Implementation Guidance Transition plan being
developed by EFRAG.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 118 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question ID 734 – Disclosure of progress in meeting climate-related
targets
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Is the understanding correct that undertakings can add the amount of emissions reduced before
their new base year to the actual emissions of the new base year and therefore suggest that the
past emissions have not been realised?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 34 (c) and AR 25 (d)
Key terms
Climate-related targets, progress
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph 34 states: ‘If the undertaking has set GHG emission reduction targets, ESRS 2
MDR-T and the following requirements shall apply …
(c) the undertaking shall disclose its current base year and baseline value, and from 2030
onwards, update the base year for its GHG emission reduction targets after every five-
year period thereafter. The undertaking may disclose the past progress made in meeting
its targets before its current base year provided that this information is consistent with
the requirements of this Standard …’.
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 25 states: ‘When disclosing the information required under paragraph 34(c)
on base year and baseline value: …
(d) when presenting climate-related targets, the undertaking may disclose the progress in
meeting these targets made before its current base year. In doing so, the undertaking
shall, to the greatest extent possible, ensure that the information on past progress is
consistent with the requirements of this Standard. In the case of methodological
differences, for example, regarding target boundaries, the undertaking shall provide a
brief explanation for these differences.’
Answer
No, an undertaking cannot add the amount of emissions reduced before its new base year to the
actual emissions of the new base year and therefore suggest that the past emissions have not
been realised.
While undertakings may disclose the progress done in meeting these targets before their current
base year, when doing it undertakings may disclose quantitative and qualitative information, e.g.
disclosure of the amount of the emissions reduced, an explanation in case of methodological
differences, an explanation of the alignment with the requirements of the E1 Standard, etc.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 119 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
However, it is not allowed to add previous emission reductions achieved to the new base year
emissions, which shall be the ones effectively disclosed under the ESRS for the new base year
(with no additions or subtractions).
It is important to note that, even if an undertaking cannot add the amount of emissions reduced
before its new base year, this reduction might have an impact on the future targets set by the
undertaking as it is linked to the sector emission reduction path.
For example, assuming that the current (new) base year is 2025, the amount of reductions in Y-1
(i.e. 2024) cannot be added to the 2025 base year as displayed in the following table.
ESRS E1-5 Energy consumption and mix
Question ID 36 - Energy mix
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
Does disclosure E1-37 (b) refer to all forms of energy generated from nuclear sources, such as
electricity? Does ESRS E1 paragraph 37 (b) also encompass electricity mixes that include fractions
of nuclear-generated electricity?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-5, ESRS E1 paragraphs AR 34 - 35
Key terms
Energy consumption; nuclear sources
Background
ESRS E1 paragraphs 35 to 37 state:
‘35. The undertaking shall provide information on its energy consumption and mix.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 120 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
36. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of the
undertaking’s total energy consumption in absolute value, improvement in energy efficiency,
exposure to coal, oil and gas-related activities, and the share of renewable energy in its overall
energy mix.
37. The disclosure required by ESRS E1 paragraph 35 shall include the total energy consumption
in MWh related to own operations disaggregated by
(a) total energy consumption from fossil sources;
(b) total energy consumption from nuclear sources; and
(c) total energy consumption from renewable sources disaggregated by
i. fuel consumption for renewable sources, including biomass (also comprising industrial
and municipal waste of biologic origin), biofuels, biogas, hydrogen from renewable
sources, etc. …’
ESRS 2 MDR-M paragraph 77 requires the undertakings to disclose the significant assumptions
behind the metric, including the limitations of the methodologies used.
Answer
ESRS E1 paragraph 37 (b) requires the disclosure of total energy consumption from nuclear
sources.
ESRS E1 paragraph AR32 (d) clarifies that the energy to be reported should refer to ‘final energy
consumption’, which includes energy carriers such as electricity, heat and steam that can be and
are frequently derived from nuclear sources.
An undertaking disclosing on the basis of ESRS 1 paragraph 35 should thus report the final energy
consumption taking into account its energy mix, which may involve proportions of nuclear-
generated electricity, heat, steam, and cooling; fossil-fuel generated electricity, heat, steam,
cooling and fuels; or renewable electricity, heat, steam, cooling and fuels.
This disclosure requires the undertaking to understand from its consumption of electricity which
portions originate from nuclear, fossil or renewables sources. When electricity, heat and steam
are purchased and the mix includes fractions of nuclear-generated electricity, heat, and steam,
these fractions are to be included in the disclosures under ESRS E1 paragraph 37 (b) on total
energy consumption from nuclear sources. The undertaking should use the information available
on the electricity, heat and steam mix to reflect its energy consumption breakdown according to
ESRS E1 paragraph 35 accurately.
Question ID 338 – Activities in high-climate impact sectors
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
How should the sentence ‘associated with activities in high-impact sectors’ be understood? Does
it exclusively refer to the sectors in which the reporting undertaking itself operates?
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 121 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 38, 40 and AR 36 (c); ESRS 2 paragraphs 40 (b), 40 (c) and AR 13
Key terms
Impact sectors
Background
ESRS E1 mentions the Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 Annex I(9) when
referring to the definition of ‘high-climate sectors’.
According to Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 Annex I(9), ‘high-impact climate
sectors’ means the sectors listed in Sections A to H and Section L of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No
1893/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ESRS E1 paragraph 38 states that the undertaking with operations in high-climate impact sectors
shall further disaggregate their total energy consumption from fossil sources by:
(a) fuel consumption from coal and coal products;
(b) fuel consumption from crude oil and petroleum products;
(c) fuel consumption from natural gas;
(d) fuel consumption from other fossil sources; and
(e) consumption of purchased or acquired electricity, heat, steam or cooling from fossil
sources.
ESRS E1 paragraph 40 states that the undertaking shall provide information on the energy
intensity (total energy consumption per net revenue) associated with activities in high-climate
impact sectors.
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 36 (a) provides the calculation formula in which total energy consumption
from activities in high-climate impact sectors is in a numerator while net revenue from activities
in high-climate impact sectors is in a denominator. Moreover, point (c) of this AR clarifies that the
numerator and denominator shall only consist of the proportion of the total final energy
consumption (in the numerator) and net revenue (in the denominator) that are attributable to
activities in high-climate impact sectors. Finally, this point provides that, in effect, there should be
consistency in the scope of both the numerator and denominator.
Answer
According to Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 Annex I(9), high-climate impact
sectors are those listed in NACE Sections A to H and Section L of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No
1893/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council. The list of targeted sections is the
following.
Section A: Agriculture, forestry and fishing (NACE division 01-03)
Section B: Mining and quarrying (NACE division 05-09)
Section C: Manufacturing (NACE division 10-33)
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 122 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Section D: Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply (NACE division 35)
Section E: Water supply; Sewerage, waste management and remediation activities (NACE
division 36-39)
Section F: Construction (NACE division 41-43)
Section G: Wholesale and retail trade; Repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles (NACE
division 45-47)
Section H: Transportation and storage (NACE division 49-53)
Section L: Real estate activities (NACE division 68)
It is important to note that the high-climate impact sectors are determined at the NACE code
activity level (linked to the undertaking’s own operations) and not by the undertaking’s (ESRS)
sector(s) of activity (as defined in ESRS 2 paragraph 40 (b)(c) and AR 13.
Question ID 893 – Conversion factor fossil fuels
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Which indicators are to be used to convert fossil fuels to kWh (gasoline, diesel, natural gas)?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 32
Key terms
Conversion factors; fossil fuels
Background
The submitter also asked about the ‘conversion of air conditioning refrigerants to kWh.’ As there
is no need to convert air conditioning refrigerants into energy units, this question is not addressed.
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 32 states: ‘When preparing the information on energy consumption
required under paragraph 35, the undertaking shall: …
(d) ensure all quantitative energy-related information is reported in either Mega-
Watthours (MWh) in Lower Heating Value or net calorific value. If raw data of energy-
related information is only available in energy units other than MWh (such as Giga
Joules (GJ) or eritish Thermal Units (etu)), in volume units (such as cubic feet or gallons)
or in mass units (such as kilograms or pounds), they shall be converted to MWh using
suitable conversion factors (see, for example, Annex II of the Fifth Assessment IPCC
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 123 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
report). Conversion factors for fuels shall be made transparent and applied in a
consistent manner …’.
Answer
Conversion factors for the energy content of fuels (so-called ‘heating’ or ‘calorific values’) need to
be used when preparing information on energy consumption. Heating values can be direct or
indirect data, originate from multiple sources, and be expressed in different ways (e.g. energy per
weight or energy per volume).
Direct data on heating values will result from the analysis of the heat content of fuels used and
from which a conversation factor is derived. This is typically done by very large energy consumers
(and emitters) who need to know well the fuels they use, for example, power production from
fossil fuels.
Indirect data on heating values can comprise, for example, data from fuel suppliers, national
statistics data or engineering/technical factors representing usually accepted average figures for
each fuel type, often reported as ranges (e.g. biodiesel 39–41 MJ/kg).
Common sources of indirect data for heating values are:
(a) 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (Table 1.2, page 1.18), also
used as a reference for Annex VI of the EU ETS Monitoring and reporting regulation;
(b) the UN Energy Statistics Yearbook, which provides statistical series of Heating values for
different fuels and countries (see the supplement to the 2021 Energy Statistics Database);
(c) GHG national inventories reports (NIR) submitted to the UNFCCC; and publications from
energy statistics by the national statistics or energy authorities.
(d) It is important to note that calorific value changes across jurisdictions.
Question ID 1126 – Heating values and geographical location of
undertaking
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
What are the CSRD requirements regarding heating values (Lower Heating Value (LHV) versus
Higher Heating value (HHV)), and do they differ based on the location of the preparer?
ESRS Reference
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 32
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 124 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Key terms
Heating values; location; energy consumption
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 32 states that ‘when preparing the information on energy consumption
required under paragraph 35, the undertaking shall:
(a) only report energy consumed from processes owned or controlled by the undertaking
applying the same perimeter applied for reporting GHG Scopes 1 and 2 emissions;
(b) exclude feedstocks and fuels that are not combusted for energy purposes. The undertaking
that consumes fuel as feedstocks can disclose information on this consumption separately
from the required disclosures;
(c) ensure all quantitative energy-related information is reported in either Mega-Watt-hours
(MWh) in Lower Heating Value or net calorific value. If raw data of energy-related
information is only available in energy units other than MWh (such as Giga-Joules (GJ) or
British Thermal Units (Btu)), in volume units (such as cubic feet or gallons) or in mass units
(such as kilograms or pounds), they shall be converted to MWh using suitable conversion
factors (see for example Annex II of the Fifth Assessment IPCC report). Conversion factors
for fuels shall be made transparent and applied in a consistent manner’.
For further guidance on Heating Values, see the content below.
‘Most fuels are mixtures of carbon and hydrogen and these are the main heating agents. There
may be other elements which do not contribute, or contribute only slightly, to the calorific value
of the fuel. Both the carbon and the hydrogen combine with oxygen during combustion and the
reactions provide the heat. When the hydrogen combines with oxygen, it forms water in a gaseous
or vapour state at the high temperature of the combustion. The water is therefore almost always
carried away with the other products of combustion in the exhaust gases from the apparatus in
which the combustion takes place (boiler, engine, furnace, etc.).
When the exhaust gases cool, the water will condense into a liquid state and release heat known
as latent heat, which is wasted in the atmosphere. The heating value of a fuel may, therefore, be
expressed as a gross value or a net value. The gross value includes all of the heat released from
the fuel, including any carried away in the water formed during combustion. The net value
excludes the latent heat of the water formed during combustion. It is important when obtaining
a calorific value to check whether it is net or gross. The differences between net and gross are
typically about 5% to 6% of the gross value for solid and liquid fuels and about 10% for natural
gas.
There are a few fuels which contain no, or very little, hydrogen (for example blastfurnace gas,
high-temperature cokes and some petroleum cokes). In these cases, there will be negligible
differences between net and gross calorific values.
The derivation of net calorific values for solid fuels is further complicated because they often
contain water trapped within the fuel in addition to the water which will be formed from the
hydrogen they contain. The reduction in net calorific value as a result of the additional water is
uncertain because the dampness of the fuel may vary according to weather and storage
conditions.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 125 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
In summary, the net calorific value of a fuel is the total heat produced by burning it minus the
heat needed to evaporate the water present in the fuel or produced during its combustion. Major
users of solid fuels, such as power stations, should be able to provide net calorific values based
on the monitoring of the electricity generation’ (Source: IEA (2004), Energy Statistics Manual, IEA,
Paris, Licence: CC BY 4.0)
There are multiple sources of conversion expressions between HHV and LHV depending on the
fuels (coal, NG, biomass, etc.), which can also vary in origin and treatment of fuels in each region.
Undertakings are advised to search for appropriate conversion expressions for their particular
circumstances.
Answer
According to the ESRS E1 paragraph AR 32, the undertaking is required to disclose quantitative
energy-related information in Mega-Watt-hours (MWh) in Lower Heating Value (LHV) (or net
calorific value, NCV).
Undertakings that typically use Higher Heating Values (HHVs) (e.g. in certain locations, for certain
technologies and/or based on conventions related to energy carriers) must disclose using LHV or
net calorific value to comply with the ESRS, which may imply using fuel specific conversion
formulas between HHV and LHV.
Note: The LHV (or NCV) of a fuel is the total heat produced by burning it minus the heat needed
to evaporate the water present in the fuel or produced during its combustion (see more
information on heating values in the background).
ESRS E1-6 Gross scopes 1, 2, 3 and total GHG emissionsQuestion ID 81
- Subsidiaries and holding company – alignment for GHG protocol
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
Should all the subsidiaries and the parent company in a consolidated sustainability statement use
the same criteria and methodology for GHG emissions?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 Appendix B Qualitative characteristics of information; ESRS 2 paragraph 77 (a); ESRS E1
paragraphs 50, AR 39 (b), AR 42, and AR 46 (h).
Key terms
GHG protocol; holding companies; alignment in methodology
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 126 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
The original question submitted: ‘Should the companies of a holding company use the same
criteria and methodology for GHG emissions?’ has been reworded to the above question to be
clearer.
ESRS 1 Appendix B, qualitative characteristics of information shall be applied in the preparation
of the ESRS sustainability statement.
ESRS 2 paragraph 77 (a) states: ‘disclose the methodologies and significant assumptions behind
the metric, including the limitations of the methodologies used;’. ESRS E1 paragraph AR 39 (b)
requires the undertaking to: ‘disclose the methodologies, significant assumptions and emissions
factors used to calculate or measure GHG emissions accompanied by the reasons why they were
chosen, and provide a reference or link to any calculation tools used.’ Moreover, ESRS E1
paragraph AR46 (h), on Scope 3 emissions, requires clarity on the boundaries considered and the
methods used for estimating emissions: ‘for each significant Scope 3 GHG category, disclose the
reporting boundaries considered, the calculation methods for estimating the GHG emissions as
well as if and which calculation tools were applied. The Scope 3 categories should be consistent
with the GHGP and include:
(a) indirect Scope 3 GHG emissions from the consolidated accounting group (the parent
and its subsidiaries),
(b) indirect Scope 3 GHG emissions from associates, joint ventures, and unconsolidated
subsidiaries for which the undertaking has the ability to control the operational
activities and relationships (i.e., operational control),
(c) Scope 1, 2 and 3 GHG emissions from associates, joint ventures, unconsolidated
subsidiaries (investment entities) and joint arrangements for which the undertaking
does not have operational control and when these entities are part of the undertaking’s
upstream and downstream value chain.’
All these requirements point to the advantages of using a uniform approach for ease of
understanding and transparency.
Answer
All subsidiaries and their parent undertaking shall apply the requirements of ESRS, including the
qualitative characteristics of information in ESRS 1 Appendix B. The GHG Protocol is the reference
for the calculation of GHG emissions following ESRS E1. The sustainability statement shall include
the methodology and the significant assumptions made by the parent and subsidiaries regarding
GHG emissions, as stated in ESRS E1 paragraph AR 39.
ESRS does not exclude flexibility in the methodologies used by different undertakings in the same
group, provided that the qualitative characteristics of information are met.
A standardised approach from the onset is advantageous for its consistency, comparability,
transparency and the overall integrity of reported GHG emissions.
Deviations from a common methodology can be accepted but should be disclosed, along with the
rationale for their use, to meet the transparency requirements set forth by the ESRS.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 127 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Using diverging methodologies for similar or comparable fact patterns can result in information
that may not comply with the qualitative characteristics of information required by the ESRS
(ESRS 1, Appendix B).
Question ID 43 - Scope 3 GHG emissions for insurance companies
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
What is the scope of reporting scope 3 greenhouse gas emissions for insurance companies?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 3.2 Material matters and material information; ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement
E1-6 – Gross Scopes 1, 2, 3 and Total GHG emissions and related AR;
Key terms
Materiality assessment, materiality, relevance; scope 3 GHG emissions, insurance companies,
financial investment
Background
The determination of which categories of Scope 3 greenhouse gas emissions to include in the
sustainability statement is driven by the materiality assessment of the company, namely in the
scope of the analysis of ESRS 1 paragraph 31, which states that ‘The applicable information
prescribed within a Disclosure Requirement, including its datapoints, or an entity-specific
disclosure, shall be disclosed when the undertaking assesses, as part of its assessment of material
information, that the information is relevant from one or more of the following perspectives: (a)
the significance of the information in relation to the matter it purports to depict or explain; or (b)
the capacity of such information to meet the users’ decision-making needs, including the needs
of primary users of general-purpose financial reporting described in paragraph 48 and/or the
needs of users whose principal interest is in information about the undertaking’s impacts.’
If climate change is considered a material topic by the undertaking, insurance companies are
required by ESRS E1 paragraphs 44 and 51 to disclose their gross Scope 3 greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions for each of the Scope 3 categories that they assess to be ‘significant’, encompassing
emissions within their upstream and downstream value chain. This includes emissions over which
the company does not have direct control but that may have a significant impact on its overall
carbon footprint and transition risks, as outlined in ESRS E1 paragraph 45.
In making its evaluation of the ‘significant Scope 3 categories’, the company shall consider, in
accordance with ESRS E1 AR39 (a), the principles, requirements and guidance of the GHG Protocol
Corporate Standard. The GHG Protocol also includes a supplement ‘GHG protocol Corporate Value
Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard’ (also referred to in this document as ‘GHGP
Scope 3 standard’), which makes reference as well to the GHG Protocol ‘Technical Guidance for
calculating Scope 3 Emissions’ (v1.0), a supplement to the GHGP Scope 3 standard.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 128 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
To be considered: Principle of relevance, as defined in the “GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting
and Reporting Standard” and further articulated in “relevance criteria” by the “GHG protocol
Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard”, as well as the “Technical
Guidance for calculating Scope 3 Emissions”.
The GHG Protocol Scope 3 Category 15 is specifically tailored to financial institutions – which
includes insurance undertakings – and the following financial investments and services are
required to be reported (under the GHG Scope 3 standard, Table 5.9, pp.52): equity investments,
debt investments and project finance.
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 46 states that the financial institution shall consider the GHG Accounting
and Reporting Standard for the Financial Industry from the Partnership for Carbon Accounting
Financial (PCAF), specifically part A ‘Financed Emissions’ (version December 2022).
Answer
When reporting on their gross Scope 3 greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, the undertaking discloses
the amounts corresponding to the Scope 3 categories that it considers significant. For
investments, this will factor in the scale of the investments and the associated indirect GHG
emissions. The company should follow the principles, requirements and guidance laid out in the
GHG Protocol Corporate Standard, the GHGP Scope 3 standard as well as the associated Scope 3
calculation guidance. Moreover, as stated in ESRS E1 paragraph AR 46 (b), financial institutions
shall consider the GHG Accounting and Reporting Standard for the Financial Industry from the
Partnership for Carbon Accounting Financial (PCAF), specifically part A ‘Financed Emissions’
(version December 2022).
Supporting material
https://ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/2022-12/Chapter15.pdf
https://ghgprotocol.org/scope-3-calculation-guidance-2
Question ID 167 - GHG protocol scope 3; sector
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
Is there a requirement for, or guidance around, the methods allowed to calculate Scope 3
emissions from shipping?
Key Terms
Scope 3, value vhain
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 Annex B: qualitative characteristics of information; ESRS E1 paragraphs 44 and AR39, AR46
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 129 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
ESRS 1 Annex B, on qualitative characteristics of information, provides important principles and
criteria to apply in the assessment of which calculation methodologies and which input data to
use in the preparation of ESRS disclosures.
ESRS E1 paragraph 44 requires the disclosure of gross Scope 3 GHG emissions, as well as the other
two Scopes regarding GHG emissions, and ESRS E1 AR39 (a) states that ‘the undertaking shall
consider the principles, requirements and guidance provided by the GHG Protocol Corporate
Standard (version 2004) … ‘, which in this case also includes the GHG Protocol Corporate Value
Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard (Version 2011 mentioned in ESRS E1 AR 46
(a)) as well as the ‘Technical guidance for calculating Scope 3 emissions’ (version 1.0).
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 46 details other requirements related to the reporting of Scope 3 GHG
emissions. In particular, ESRS E1 paragraph AR 46 (g) highlights the need to disclose the
percentage of emissions calculated using primary data obtained from suppliers or other value
chain partners by stating that: ‘disclose the extent to which the undertaking’s Scope 3 GHG
emissions are measured using inputs from specific activities within the entity’s upstream and
downstream value chain, and disclose the percentage of emissions calculated using primary data
obtained from suppliers or other value chain partners.’
Other methodological details that go beyond the provisions included in the ‘Technical guidance
for calculating Scope 3 emissions’ (version 1.0) are not provided within the ESRS. Additional
provisions may be envisaged as part of future ESRS sector standards.
Answer
The ESRS set reporting standards but do not prescribe detailed calculation methodologies.
However, when determining the methodology and input to be used, the undertaking shall apply
the criteria defined under ESRS 1 Annex B, qualitative characteristics of information, as well as
requirements to consider the GHG Protocol Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and
Reporting Standard (Version 2011 mentioned in ESRS E1 paragraph AR 46 (a)) and the ‘Technical
guidance for calculating Scope 3 emissions’ (version 1.0). Additional provisions may be envisaged
as part of future ESRS sector standards.
Question ID 208 - GHG emission calculation
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
The undertaking shall disclose in metric tonnes of CO2eq its (a) gross Scope 1 GHG emissions, (b)
gross Scope 2 GHG emissions, (c) gross Scope 3 GHG emissions and (d) total GHG emissions. The
question is, how could this be done?
(1) What methodologies should be used and where can they be found?
(2) What exactly are the equivalents for the calculation? Offer interesting, concrete examples.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 130 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 44, and AR 39
Key Terms
GHG emission calculation; ISO; IPCC
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph 44 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose in metric tonnes of CO2eq its:
(a) gross Scope 1 GHG emission,
(b) gross Scope 2 GHG emission,
(c) gross Scope 3 GHG emission; and
(d) total GHG emission’.
ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirements E1-6 – Gross Scopes 1,2,3 and Total GHG emission give some
details on the calculation guidance for GHG emission. ESRS E1 paragraph AR39 states that ‘the
undertaking shall consider the principles, requirements and guidance provided by the GHG
Protocol Corporate Standard (version 2004). The undertaking may consider the Commission
Recommendation (EU) 2021/2279 or the requirements stipulated by EN ISO 14064-1:2018 …’
CO2e is a unit used in GHG accounting that reflects the amount of carbon dioxide (CO2) emission
that would cause the same integrated radiative forcing or temperature change over a given time
horizon as an emitted amount of a greenhouse gas (GHG) or a mixture of GHGs. To calculate
emissions in CO2e, the different Global Warming Potential (GWP) of GHGs should be used. GWPs
are used to evaluate releasing (or avoid releasing) different greenhouse gases on a common basis
– commonly, one tonne of CO2. As per ESRS E1 paragraph AR39, when reporting emissions the
undertaking shall ‘use the most recent Global Warming Potential (GWP) values published by the
IPCC based on a 100-year time horizon to calculate CO2eq emissions of non-CO2 gases’.
Answer
(1) How can GHG emissions be calculated and what methodologies can be used?
The undertaking shall consider the principles, requirements and guidance provided by the GHG
Protocol Corporate Standard (version 2004). The undertaking may consider Commission
Recommendation (EU) 2021/2279 or the requirements stipulated by EN ISO 14064-1:2018. This
gives further details on GHG emission calculation guidance.
If further support is needed, the GHG Protocol website also provides further guidance, calculation
tools and online training on GHG accounting.
It is to be noted that ESRS are specifying some of the applications of the GHG protocol, in
particular in respect of operational control (see ESRS E1 paragraphs 46 and 50).
(2) What exactly are the CO2 equivalents used for the calculation?
When expressing its GHG emissions, the preparer shall make it in units of Tco2e, using the latest
Global Warming Potential (GWP) values published by the IPCC based on a 100-year time horizon.
CO2eq is the universal unit of measurement to indicate the global warming potential (GWP) of
each greenhouse gas, expressed in terms of the GWP of one unit of carbon dioxide. It is used to
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 131 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
evaluate releasing different greenhouse gases on a common basis. GWP is a factor describing the
radiative forcing impact (degree of harm to the atmosphere) of one unit of a given GHG relative
to one unit of CO2. The current list is the one in the IPCC’s 6th Assessment Report, Chapter 7SM3.
Question ID 251 - Emission factors disclosure
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Does the disclosure of emission factors include the values in, for example, 500 gCO2e/kWh, or is
the description of the emission factor related to the source of the emission factor sufficient? Is
the reporting organisation obliged to make the calculation tools publicly accessible or is only the
access for auditors and EU/national authorities mandatory?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 39 (b)
Key Terms
GHG emission factors
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 39 (b) states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the methodologies, significant
assumptions and emissions factors used to calculate or measure GHG emissions accompanied by
the reasons why they were chosen and provide a reference or link to any calculation tools used’.
Answer
Users of information should be able to understand how the GHG inventory figures have been
determined. For these purposes, it may be sufficient to refer to the sources of emission factors
(EF) without providing the actual figures – which could result in too detailed a reporting and
potentially obscure the relevant information. Alternatively, where the EF is a key determinant of
a significant reported figure, it may be useful to disclose the actual values of an emission factor. It
is up to the preparer to make the determination of when it is most appropriate to disclose just
the source of EFs or to disclose the EF value.
Question ID 268 – GHG emissions and annual update
Release date
July 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 132 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question asked
I would like to know if corporates need to update and disclose their Gross GHG scopes 1-3 each
year to comply with the ESRS requirements.
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraph 30, 73, 132 and 133 (b); Appendix C (reference to E1-6); ESRS E1 paragraph 44,
AR 46 (f)
Key Terms
GHG emission; annual update
Background
The original question submitted is the following: ‘GHG Emission Gross – scope 1-3— I would like
to know if corporates need to update and disclose their GHG emissions each year to comply with
the CSRD reporting.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 30 provides that when the undertaking concludes that a sustainability matter
is material ‘… it shall: (a) disclose information according to the Disclosure Requirements (including
Application Requirements) related to that specific sustainability matter in the corresponding
topical ESRS …’. ESRS 1 paragraph 73 states: ‘The reporting period for the undertaking’s
sustainability statement shall be consistent with that of its financial statements.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 132 states: ‘For the first three years of the undertaking’s sustainability reporting
under the ESRS, in the event that not all the necessary information regarding its upstream and
downstream value chain is available, the undertaking shall explain the efforts made to obtain the
necessary information about its upstream and downstream value chain, the reasons why not all
of the necessary information could be obtained, and its plans to obtain the necessary information
in the future.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 133 states: ‘For the first three years of its sustainability reporting under the
ESRS …
(b) when disclosing metrics, the undertaking is not required to include upstream and
downstream value chain information, except for datapoints derived from other EU
legislation, as listed in ESRS 2 Appendix B.’
This appendix includes Scope 1-3 and total emissions.
ESRS 1 Appendix C: List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements includes reference to E1-6
Disclosure Requirement, indicating that undertakings or groups not exceeding on their balance
sheet dates the average number of 750 employees during the financial year (on a consolidated
basis where applicable) may omit the datapoints on Scope 3 emissions and total GHG emissions
for the first year of preparation of their sustainability statement.
ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6 paragraph 44 requires the undertaking to disclose its gross
Scope 1, Scope 2, Scope 3 and total GHG emissions. With respect to the Scope 3, ESRS E1
paragraph AR 46 (f) requires updating Scope 3 GHG emissions in each significant category every
year on the basis of current activity data and updating the full Scope 3 GHG inventory at least
every three years or on the occurrence of a significant event or significant change in the
circumstances.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 133 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Answer
An undertaking shall disclose and update their Gross Scopes 1, 2, 3 and Total GHG emissions on
an annual basis (consistent with financial statements, as per ESRS 1 paragraph 73) and in
accordance with the provisions of ESRS 1 and ESRS E1-6.
With regard to Scope 3 GHG emissions more specifically, the update of Scope 3 GHG emissions in
each significant category shall occur every year on the basis of current activity data; the update
of the full Scope 3 GHG inventory is required at least every three years or on the occurrence of a
significant event or a significant change in circumstances (see ESRS E1 paragraph AR 46 (f)).
Question ID 414 – Disaggregation of total emissions
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Should ESRS E1 paragraph AR 48 including the table for disaggregating total emissions be
interpreted as a mandate that all disclosers use the given table (as suggested using ‘shall’)? If so,
could the meaning of the columns be more clearly specified?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 48
Key terms
Total emissions
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 48 states that the undertaking shall disclose its total GHG emissions
disaggregated by Scopes 1 and 2 and significant Scope 3 in accordance with the table below.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 134 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
The retrospective columns concern historical data. The base year is the historical reference date
or period for which information is available and against which subsequent information can be
compared over time, as stated in ESRS 1 Chapter 6.3 Reporting progress against the base year.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 135 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 25 requires that when setting new targets the undertaking select a recent
base year that does not precede the first reporting year of the new target period by more than
three years. For example, for 2030 as the target year and a target period between 2025 and 2030,
the base year shall be selected from the period between 2022 and 2025. For the following five-
year period, the base year should be 2030. If early reductions have been achieved, these should
be explained in another table or by adding new columns. Further explanations are available at ID
531 GHG emission reduction targets – base year.
ESRS 1 Chapter 7.1 Presenting comparative information states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose
comparative information in respect of the previous period for all quantitative metrics and
monetary amounts disclosed in the current period.’ That is, the undertaking shall present previous
reporting year data for comparison purposes in the third ‘comparative’ column.
In column N (fourth column), the undertaking presents the current reporting year figures, and in
the fifth column it shall present the percentage reduction / increase of the value in the current
year over the previous year.
The milestones and target years columns are for reporting target information for the years 2025,
2030 and 2050 (if available). It is suggested to include all target values between 2035 and 2050
that the undertaking has set by using the column ‘2050’ as a placeholder for those targets or by
adding more columns to the table as applicable – given the requirement in ESRS E1 paragraph 34
(d) to update the target year every five years from 2030 onwards. Finally, the ninth column is for
reporting the average annual emission reduction figure by using the following formula:
𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟
1−
𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟
𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 =
𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟−𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟
Answer
Yes, the undertaking is required to disclose its total GHG emissions disaggregated by Scopes 1 and
2 and significant Scope 3 in accordance with the table provided in ESRS E1 paragraph AR 48. Note
that the undertaking is only required to fill the cells of the table that are applicable to the
undertaking, meaning that for Scope 3 only significant categories (see ESRS E1 paragraph AR 46)
are to be disclosed and that the cells under ‘Milestones and target years’ are to be filled according
to the targets set by the undertaking.
The columns of the table are the following:
The base year: for reporting the value of the metric in the base year against which progress
towards the target is measured
Comparative year: for reporting the previous year’s (compared to the reporting year’s)
value for the metric
N: the value for the metric in the current year
% N/N-1: percentage reduction / increase from previous year
2025: value of target for the metric in year 2025
2030: value of target for the metric in year 2030
(2050): value of interim targets set for the metric in the years between 2035 and 2050
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 136 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Annual % target / base year: report on the average annual emission reduction figure
achieved so far by using the following formula:
𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟
1−
𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 .
𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟−𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟
Question ID 535 – Emission trading schemes
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Is there a clear definition or exhaustive list of ‘regulated Emission Trading Schemes’?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 48 (b) and AR 44
Key terms
Emission trading schemes
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph 48 states: ‘The disclosure on gross Scope 1 GHG emissions required by
paragraph 44 (a) shall include:
(a) the gross Scope 1 GHG emissions in metric tonnes of CO2eq; and
(b) the percentage of Scope 1 GHG emissions from regulated emission trading schemes.’
The related ESRS E1 paragraph AR 44 states: ‘When preparing the information on the percentage
of Scope 1 GHG emissions from regulated emission trading schemes required under paragraph 48
(b), the undertaking shall:
(a) consider GHG emissions from the installations it operates that are subject to regulated
Emission Trading Schemes (ETS), including the EU-ETS, national ETS and non-EU ETS, if
applicable;
(b) only include emissions of CO2, CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs, SF6 and NF3;
(c) ensure the same accounting period for gross Scope 1 GHG emissions and GHG emissions
regulated under the ETS; and
(d) calculate the share by using the following formula:
GHG Emissions in (t CO2eq) from EU ETS installations + national ETS installations + non EU ETS installations
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 137 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Scope 1 GHG emissions (t CO2eq)’
CDP provides a list of ETS’s around the world that can be found in the guidance to question ‘3.5.2
– Provide details of each Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) your organization is regulated by’ of
‘CDP Full Corporate Questionnaire’ (version May 2024).
Answer
The undertaking shall consider GHG emissions from the installations it operates that are subject
to regulated Emission Trading Schemes (ETS), including the EU-ETS, national ETS and non-EU ETS,
if applicable (ESRS E1 AR 44). The schemes that fall under this requirement, therefore, include not
only EU ETS but those regulated ETS which are either upcoming and/or non-EU trading schemes.
Only emissions of CO2, CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs, SF6 and NF3 shall be included. Separate ETS for
other greenhouse gases do not have to be included. Currently, there is no clear definition or
exhaustive list of ‘regulated Emission Trading Schemes’. CDP provides an indicative, non-
exhaustive list of ETS around the world, showing examples of ETS. The list is the following:
Alberta TIER – ETS
Australia ERF Safeguard Mechanism – ETS
Austria – ETS
BC GGIRCA – ETS
Beijing pilot ETS
California CaT – ETS
Canada federal OBPS – ETS
China national ETS
Chongqing pilot ETS
EU ETS
Fujian pilot ETS
Germany ETS
Guangdong pilot ETS
Hubei pilot ETS
Indonesia ETS
Kazakhstan ETS
Korea ETS
Massachusetts state ETS
Mexico pilot ETS
Montenegro ETS
New Brunswick ETS
New Zealand ETS
Newfoundland and Labrador PSS – ETS
Nova Scotia CaT – ETS
Ontario EPS – ETS
Oregon ETS
Québec CaT – ETS
RGGI – ETS
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 138 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Saitama ETS
Sakhalin ETS
Saskatchewan OBPS – ETS
Shanghai pilot ETS
Shenzhen pilot ETS
Switzerland ETS
Tianjin pilot ETS
Tokyo CaT – ETS
UK ETS
Vietnam ETS
Washington CAR – ETS
Question ID 698 – Database for GHG emission factors
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Is it allowed to use OEKOBAUDAT data after EN 15804 to report GHG emissions within the ESRS?
Within ESRS, the Commission Recommendation (EU) 2021/2279 is allowed to use and indicate
the use of Environmental Footprint EF v3.1 impact categories. On the JRC website, it seems as if
EF v.3.1 impact categories and EN 15804 impact categories are harmonised. Does this mean that
these two impact categories (EF V3.1 and OEKOBAUDAT) can be used? Can they be summed up
when reporting after (EU) 2021/2279?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 39
Key terms
GHG emissions; impact categories; GHG emission factor database
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 39 states: ‘When preparing the information for reporting GHG emissions
as required by paragraph 44, the undertaking shall:
(a) consider the principles, requirements and guidance provided by the GHG Protocol
Corporate Standard (version 2004) [and] may consider Commission Recommendation
(EU) 2021/2279 or the requirements stipulated by EN ISO 14064-1:2018. If the
undertaking already applies the GHG accounting methodology of ISO 14064-1: 2018, it
shall nevertheless comply with the requirements of this standard (e.g. regarding
reporting boundaries and the disclosure of market-based Scope 2 GHG emissions); … and
(c) use the most recent Global Warming Potential (GWP) values published by the IPCC based
on a 100-year time horizon to calculate Co2eq emissions of non-Co2 gases.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 139 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
The ÖKOBAUDAT platform is offered as a standardised database for ecological evaluations of
buildings by the German Federal Ministry for Housing, Urban Development and Building.
The EN 15804 is the Environmental Product Declaration (EPD) standard for the sustainability of
construction works and services. This standard harmonises the structure of EPDs in the
construction sector, making the information transparent and comparable. Under EN 15804 the
impact category ‘climate change total’ relates to total GHG emissions calculated on the basis of a
Global Warming Potential of 100 years (GWP100), which is consistent with ESRS E1 paragraph
AR 39 (d).
Nevertheless, EN 15084 is a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) standard, which may give rise to some
inconsistencies with the application of a yearly annual inventory approach, such as the one
adopted in corporate sustainability reporting.
Answer
When reporting on its GHG emissions, the requirements set out in ESRS E1 need to be met.
According to ESRS E1, an undertaking shall consider the GHG Protocol Corporate Standard
(version 2004) and, in addition, it may also consider Commission Recommendation (EU)
2021/2279 or the requirements stipulated by EN ISO 14064-1:2018. Neither the GHG Protocol
Corporate Standard, the EN ISO 14064-1 nor EN 15804 have specific norms on the adequacy of
emission factors for specific uses within an inventory calculation. These issues are largely assessed
through professional judgment, which may include asking for external professional advice that
could help determine the applicability of any given emission factor to a specific calculation case.
Question ID 718 – Disaggregation of GHG emissions
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
It seems like in the disclosure requirements there is no distinction in GHG emissions based on
fossil resources and non-fossil resources. Why is this, and would EFRAG recommend emphasising
this difference in CSRD-reporting anyway?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 37, AR 39, AR 41, AR 43; ESRS 1 paragraph 55
Key terms
GHG emissions, disaggregation
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 41 states: ‘In line with ESRS 1 chapter 3.7, the undertaking shall
disaggregate information on its GHG emissions as appropriate. For example, the undertaking may
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 140 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
disaggregate its Scope 1, 2, 3, or total GHG emissions by country, operating segments, economic
activity, subsidiary, GHG category (CO2, CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs, SF6, NF3, and other GHG
considered by the undertaking) or source type (stationary combustion, mobile combustion,
process emissions and fugitive emissions).’
ESRS 1 chapter 3.7 refers to the level of disaggregation applied to support a proper understanding
of the material impacts, risks and opportunities of an undertaking. Specifically, ESRS 1 chapter 3.7
paragraph 55 states: ‘When defining the appropriate level of disaggregation for reporting, the
undertaking shall consider the disaggregation adopted in its materiality assessment.’
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 39 states: ‘When preparing the information for reporting GHG emissions
as required by paragraph 44, the undertaking shall:
(a) consider the principles, requirements and guidance provided by the GHG Protocol Corporate
Standard (version 2004) …’
ESRS E1 paragraph 37 requires a breakdown of energy consumption between fossil, nuclear and
renewable sources. Given that CO2 emissions are often associated with energy consumption, E1-
5 can provide an indication on the fossil origin of emissions.
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 43 requires a disclosure on biogenic emissions of CO emissions from the
2
combustion or biodegradation of biomass separately from Scope 1 GHG emissions, ESRS E1
paragraph AR 45 requires it separately from Scope 2 GHG emissions and ESRS E1 paragraph AR 46
separately from Scope 3 GHG emissions.
Answer
ESRS E1 paragraphs AR 43, 45 and 46 require disclosure of biogenic emissions of CO emissions
2
from the combustion or biodegradation of biomass separately from the Scope 1, 2 and 3 GHG
emissions.
In addition, the undertaking shall disaggregate the reported information when needed to support
a proper understanding of its material impacts, risks and opportunities (ESRS 1 chapter 3.7 Level
of disaggregation). It shall disaggregate information on its GHG emissions as appropriate (ESRS
E1 paragraph AR 41). Therefore, the undertaking shall disaggregate its GHG emissions by the
distinction between fossil and non-fossil resources if considered necessary for the understanding
of the impacts, risks and opportunities linked to these emissions. As stated by ESRS 1 chapter 3.7
paragraph 55, the level of disaggregation used is the one adopted in the undertaking’s materiality
assessment.
Also, ESRS E1-5 paragraph 37 requires a breakdown of energy consumption between fossil,
nuclear and renewable sources. Given that CO emissions are often associated with energy
2
consumption, ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-5 will often provide a reliable indication on the
fossil origin of an undertaking’s emissions.
Overall, when calculating and reporting on GHG emissions, ESRS E1 paragraph AR 39 (a) states
that the undertaking shall consider the principles, requirements and guidance provided by the
GHG Protocol Corporate Standard (version 2004). ESRS do not specify these further but refer to
the GHG Protocol.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 141 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
See also answers to Question ID 81 - Subsidiaries and holding company - alignment for GHG
protocol and Question ID 167 - GHG protocol scope 3; sector. These explanations elaborate on
the relationship between the ESRS and the GHG Protocol as a methodology and for Scope 3
emissions.
Question ID 831 – Contractual instruments
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Should the percentage of contractual instruments be calculated in terms of electricity
consumption, not in terms of Scope 2 GHG emissions?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 45 (d)
Key terms
Contractual instruments; scope 2
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 45 states: ‘When preparing the information on gross Scope 2 GHG emissions
required under paragraph 49, the undertaking shall: …
(d) apply the location-based and market-based methods to calculate Scope 2 GHG emissions
and provide information on the share and types of contractual instruments. Location-based
method quantifies Scope 2 GHG emissions based on average energy generation emission
factors for defined locations, including local, subnational, or national boundaries (GHG
Protocol, “Scope 2 Guidance”, Glossary, 2015). Market-based method quantifies Scope 2
GHG emissions based on GHG emissions emitted by the generators from which the
reporting entity contractually purchases electricity bundled with instruments, or unbundled
instruments on their own (GHG Protocol, “Scope 2 Guidance”, Glossary, 2015); in this case,
the undertaking may disclose the share of market-based scope 2 GHG emissions linked to
purchased electricity bundled with instruments such as Guarantee of Origins or Renewable
Energy Certificates. The undertaking shall provide information about the share and types of
contractual instruments used for the sale and purchase of energy bundled with attributes
about the energy generation or for unbundled energy attribute claims.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 142 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Answer
The percentage of contractual instruments is calculated in terms of the Scope 2 activity data –
this is the consumption of purchased or acquired electricity. The general expression is:
Electricity consumption backed by contractual instruments
% 𝑜𝑓 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠 =
Total electricity consumption
Electricity is used in this context as a shorthand for purchased or acquired electricity, heat, steam
and cooling (as per GHG Protocol). There are different types of contractual instruments such
Guarantees of Origin, Renewable Energy Certificates, direct contracts, etc.
Question ID 882 – Data availability for biogenic emissions in Scope 3
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Can a preparer state that data for biogenic emissions in Scope 3 is ‘not available’ as it is specifically
possible for Scope 2 biogenic emissions?
ESRS Reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs AR 45 (e) and AR 46 (j); ESRS 2 Chapter 5.2 Estimation using sector averages
and proxies
Key terms
Biogenic emissions; Scope 2; Scope 3; data availability; proxies; value chain
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 45 (e) states the undertaking shall ‘disclose biogenic emissions of CO2
carbon from the combustion or biodegradation of biomass separately from the Scope 2 GHG
emissions but include emissions of other types of GHG (in particular, CH4 and N2O). In case the
emission factors applied do not separate the percentage of biomass or biogenic CO2, the
undertaking shall disclose this. In case GHG emissions other than CO2 (particularly CH4 and N2O)
are not available for, or excluded from, location-based grid average emissions factors or with the
market-based method information, the undertaking shall disclose this.’
In addition to Scope 2 emissions, ESRS E1 AR 46 (j) requires the undertaking to report biogenic
Scope 3 emissions separately. ESRS E1 paragraph AR 46 (j) states that the undertaking shall
‘disclose biogenic emissions of CO2 from the combustion or biodegradation of biomass that occur
in its upstream and downstream value chain separately from the gross Scope 3 GHG emissions,
and include emissions of other types of GHG (such as CH4 and N2O), and emissions of CO2 that
occur in the life cycle of biomass other than from combustion or biodegradation (such as GHG
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 143 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
emissions from processing or transporting biomass) in the calculation of Scope 3 GHG
emissions …’.
ESRS 1 paragraphs 69 and 71 state that:
‘69. There are circumstances where the undertaking cannot collect the information about its
upstream and downstream value chain as required by paragraph 63 after making
reasonable efforts to do so. In these circumstances, the undertaking shall estimate the
information to be reported about its upstream and downstream value chain by using all
reasonable and supportable information, such as sector-average data and other proxies’;
and
‘71. With reference to metrics, in many cases, in particular for environmental matters for which
proxies are available, the undertaking may be able to comply with the reporting
requirements without collecting data from the actors in its upstream and downstream value
chain, especially from SMEs, for example, when calculating the undertaking’s GHG Scope 3
emissions.’
Illustrative example related to emission factors for biogenic emissions with
fuel combustion in mobile sources:
Access to easily available emission factors for biogenic emissions associated with fuel combustion
in mobile sources may not be readily available. However, producers of vehicles using internal
combustion engines may have to model Scope 3 CO2 biogenic emissions – if deemed material -
based on this data. If the estimation model is based on car sales per geography and average
mileage of car during its useful life this could encompass finding country by country specific data
on biofuel blends per type of fuel (diesel, gasoline, kerosene, etc), as well as likely evolution in
future years. This will then allow to introduce a correction for the CO2 emissions and CO2 biogenic
emissions of their Scope 3, Use of sold products category.
This example illustrates that while there may not be any “off the shelf” biogenic CO2 emissions
for mobile combustion, it is possible to develop models and data that allows for their
measurement. However, developing an emission model and its associated data will depend on
the scope 3 category emissions being modelled and the specific facts and circumstances of the
company.
Answer
As a reminder, it has to be clarified that AR 45(e) does not allow for the omission of Scope 2 CO
2
biogenic emissions. What it says is that, in case that CH and N O emissions are not available
4 2
within the location-based or market-based emission factors, this fact shall be disclosed. However,
this does not prevent the undertaking from estimating these emissions in case they are significant,
for example based on the emission factors provided by the IPCC (see Tables 2.2 to 2.10) for specific
fuels and combustion technologies.
Regarding GHG Scope 3 emissions, the principle of what to disclose is similar to GHG Scope 2
emissions. However, depending on the significant GHG Scope 3 category and the specific facts and
circumstances of the undertaking, the identification of biogenic CO2 emission sources, of biogenic
CO2 emission factors or the specific approach to model the biogenic CO2 emissions of the Scope
3 category may be challenging. EFRAG will develop illustrative examples in further guidance of
approaches that can be taken to model Scope 3 biogenic CO2 emissions. [An illustrative example
is listed in the background to this question.]
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 144 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS E1-7 GHG removals and GHG mitigation projects financed through
carbon credits
Question ID 432 – Net zero target and GHG removals
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
ESRS E1 paragraph 60 mentions the words ‘after approximately 90-95% of GHG reduction’.
(1) Does this mean that under ESRS my claim to net-zero will not be recognised if I neutralise
20% of my total reduction target to reach net-zero through removal techniques?
(2) Is capturing and storing CO emitted through my own operations considered to be
2
‘reduction’ or ‘removal’?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 60 and 56 (a); Annex II Acronyms and Defined Terms: Net-zero target, GHG
removal and storage
Key terms
Net-zero targets, GHG removals
Background
Regarding the net-zero target, ESRS E1 paragraph 60 states: ‘In the case where the undertaking
discloses a net-zero target in addition to the gross GHG emission reduction targets in accordance
with Disclosure Requirement E1-4 paragraph 30, [the undertaking] shall explain the scope,
methodologies and frameworks applied and how the residual GHG emissions (after
approximately 90-95% of GHG emission reduction, with the possibility for justified sectoral
variations in line with a recognised sectoral decarbonisation pathway) are intended to be
neutralised by, for example, GHG removals in its own operations and upstream and downstream
value chain.’
Annex II Acronyms and Defined Terms defines net-zero target: ‘Setting a net-zero target at the
level of an undertaking aligned with meeting societal climate goals means (1) achieving a scale of
value chain emissions reductions consistent with the depth of abatement at the point of reaching
global net-zero in 1.5˚C pathways, and (2) neutralising the impact of any residual emissions (after
approximately 90-95% of GHG emission reduction) by permanently removing an equivalent
volume of CO .’
2
Regarding GHG removals, ESRS E1 paragraph 56 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose:
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 145 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(a) GHG removals and storage in metric tonnes of CO resulting from projects it may have
2eq
developed in its own operations or contributed to in its upstream and downstream value
chain …’.
Annex II Acronyms and Defined Terms defines GHG removal and storage: ‘[Anthropogenic]
Removals refer to the withdrawal of GHGs from the atmosphere as a result of deliberate human
activities. These include enhancing biological sinks of CO and using chemical engineering to
2
achieve long-term removal and storage.’
Carbon capture and storage (CCS) from industrial and energy-related sources, which alone does
not remove CO from the atmosphere, can reduce atmospheric CO if it is combined with
2 2
bioenergy production (BECCS). Removals can be subject to reversals, which are any movement of
stored GHG out of the intended storage that re-enters the surface and atmosphere. For example,
if a forest that was grown to remove a specific amount of CO is subject to a wildfire, the emissions
2
captured in the trees are reversed.
The European Commission refers to this process as follows: ‘Capturing carbon dioxide directly
from the atmosphere (DACCS) or from the combustion or fermentation of biogenic carbon
(BECCS) has the potential to achieve negative emissions (carbon removals). The captured carbon
is subsequently either stored underground or utilized in the production of synthetic materials
such as fuels, chemicals, and building materials’ (see here for more information). For storage, CO
2
is captured from its source and compressed and transported to geological formations, including
oil and gas reservoirs, unmendable coal seams and deep saline reservoirs where it will be stored.
Answer
(1) Does this mean that under ESRS my claim to net-zero will not be recognised if I
neutralise 20% of my total reduction target to reach net-zero through removal
techniques?
Net-zero target means neutralising the impact of any residual emissions (after approximately 90-
95% of GHG emission reduction) by permanently removing an equivalent volume of CO (see the
2
definition of net-zero target above in the background). As such, neutralising more than 10% (e.g.
20%, as stated in the question) of carbon removals would not qualify to a claim of achieving a net-
zero target in accordance with the ESRS definition. As stated in ESRS E1 paragraph 60, the 90-95%
of GHG emission reduction is subject to sectoral variations, which may be reflected in the
undertaking’s net-zero target.
(2) Is capturing and storing CO emitted through my own operations considered to be
2
‘reduction’ or ‘removal’?
Please refer to the above definition of GHG removal and storage in the background section to
determine whether capturing and storing CO emitted through the undertaking’s operations
2
would qualify as removal. It will be considered a removal if it results in the withdrawal of GHG
from the atmosphere because of deliberate human activity (such as, for example, BECCS or
carbon stored in soil through enhanced agriculture practices). It should be noted that all carbon
capture and storage technologies have adverse effects that should be considered.
If an undertaking is capturing and storing CO2 that it has emitted through its own operations, this
does not necessarily represent a removal. If the carbon is of fossil origin, it may represent a
transfer of CO2 into geological storage (see article 49 of Commission Implementing Regulation
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 146 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
2018/2066 of 19 December 2018), and for the purposes of ESRS Disclosure Requirement E1-6 –
Gross Scopes 1, 2, 3 and Total GHG emissions reporting, an emission reduction. In all cases –
whether removals or transfers of fossil CO – there needs to be a policy to monitor reversals from
2
the storage pools (geological or otherwise). In case of reversals of removals (ESRS E1 paragraph
AR 58 (g)) or transfers of fossil CO , it shall be accounted as a CO emission under ESRS E1
2 2
Disclosure Requirement E1-6. Removal reversals may also be reported in a separate line item, as
per ESRS E1 paragraph AR 60.
Question ID 536 – Carbon credit – Quality standards
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Which are the recognised quality standards meant in the following sentence? ‘(a) the total
amount of carbon credits outside the undertaking’s value chain in metric tonnes of CO2eq that
are verified against recognised quality standards and cancelled in the reporting period.’ Are we
here talking about: option (1) the voluntary standards for carbon offsetting schemes such as Gold
Standard or VCR, option (2) Mandatory Clean Development Mechanisms or option (3) Voluntary
Electricity Attributes Certificates?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 59 and AR 61, AR 63; Annex II List of Acronyms and Defined Terms
Key terms
Carbon credits, quality standards for carbon credits
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph 59 states: ‘The disclosure on carbon credits required by paragraph 56 (b) shall
include, if applicable:
(a) the total amount of carbon credits outside the undertaking’s value chain in metric tonnes
of CO2eq that are verified against recognised quality standards and cancelled in the
reporting period; and …’
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 61 states: ‘Financing GHG emission reduction projects outside the
undertaking’s value chain through purchasing carbon credits that fulfil high-quality standards can
be a useful contribution towards mitigating climate change. This Standard requires the
undertaking to disclose whether it uses carbon credits separately from the GHG emissions
(paragraphs 56 (b) and 59) and GHG emission reduction targets (Disclosure Requirement E1-4). It
also requires the undertaking to show the extent of use and which quality criteria it uses for those
carbon credits.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 147 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 63 states: ‘When preparing the information on carbon credits required
under paragraphs 56 (b) and 59, the undertaking shall:
(a) Consider recognised quality standards …’
Annex II List of Acronyms and Defined Terms defines ‘Recognised quality standard for carbon
credits’: ‘Recognised quality standards for carbon credits are those that are verifiable by
independent third parties, make requirements and project reports publicly available and at a
minimum ensure additionality, permanence, avoidance of double counting and provide rules for
calculation, monitoring, and verification of the project’s GHG emissions and removals.’
Annex II List of Acronyms and Defined Terms defines ‘carbon credits’: ‘A carbon credit is a
convertible and transferable instrument representing GHG emissions that have been reduced,
avoided or removed through projects that are verified according to recognised quality standards.
Carbon credits can be issued from projects within (sometimes referred to as insets) or outside an
undertaking’s value chain (sometimes referred to as offsets).’
Answer
As stated in ESRS E1 paragraph 63, the undertaking shall consider recognised quality standards
when preparing information on carbon credits. There is currently no list of recognised quality
standards for carbon credit recognised by the EU or recommended by EFRAG. The definition of
recognised quality standard for carbon credit, detailed in the Annex II List of Acronyms and
Defined Terms, enumerates a list of criteria that need to be met:
(a) must be verifiable by independent third parties; and
(b) make requirements and project reports publicly available and at a minimum ensure:
(i) additionality,
(ii) permanence,
(iii) avoidance of double counting and provide rules for calculation,
(iv) monitoring, and
(v) verification of the project’s GHG emissions and removals.
If those criteria are met, an undertaking can consider the carbon credit as a recognised quality
standard for carbon credit.
Question ID 577 – GHG removals – Project definitions
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
What is the definition of ‘projects’ in ESRS E1 paragraph 56 (a)? Is this related to investments /
asset-driven initiatives which establish a new facility, process, technology and the like?
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 148 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Reference
ESRS E1 paragraph 56
Key terms
GHG removals; project definition
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph 56 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose:
(a) GHG removals and storage in metric tonnes of CO2eq resulting from projects it may have
developed in its own operations, or contributed to in its upstream and downstream value
chain …’
In accordance with the GHG Protocol for Project Accounting, a project is ‘A specific activity or set
of activities intended to reduce GHG emissions, increase the storage of carbon, or enhance GHG
removals from the atmosphere. A GHG project may be a stand-alone project, or a component of
a larger non-GHG project.’
Answer
In the context of ESRS E1 paragraph 56 (a), projects are all activities/interventions conducted by
the undertaking which may lead to GHG removals and storage. This is consistent with the project
definition provided in the GHG Protocol for Project Accounting (which does not only refer to GHG
removals; see ‘Background’). It is not limited to asset-driven investments although projects in
own operations may imply new asset investments or new investments in existing assets. Projects
also encompass, for instance, new application for products. Examples of GHG removal projects
include reforestation/afforestation, soil carbon enhancement, ecological restoration, blue carbon
removals, integration of bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS) technologies and
Direct Air Capture of CO2 with storage (DACCS). Projects will usually test new concepts,
technologies or products within the operating context of the company and have both a novelty
component as well as a transitory nature – the related activity is operated as a project for a certain
limited period.
Question ID 636 – Definition of types of removals
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
What are, or where can I find, the definitions of ‘biogenic removal and storage’, ‘removal and
storage from land use’, ‘technological removal and storage’ and ‘hybrid removal and storage’?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 58
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 149 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Key terms
Removals, biogenic; removal and storage of land use; technological removal and storage; removal,
hybrid and storage
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 58 states: ‘When preparing the information on GHG removals and storage
from the undertaking’s own operations and its upstream and downstream value chain required
under paragraphs 56 (a) and 58, the undertaking shall:
(a) consider, as far as applicable, the GHG Protocol Corporate Standard (version 2004),
Product Standard (version 2011), Agriculture Guidance (version 2014), land use, land-use
change, and forestry guidance for GHG project accounting (version 2006); …’
The GHG Protocol Product Life Cycle Accounting and Reporting Standard defines ‘biogenic’ as
‘Produced by living organisms or biological processes, but not fossilized or from fossil sources’.
The ESRS Glossary defines ‘Land use (change)’ as ‘The human use of a specific area for a certain
purpose (such as residential, agriculture, recreation, industrial, etc.) influenced by, but not
synonymous with, land cover. Land-use change refers to a change in the use or management of
land by humans, which may lead to a change in land cover.’
The ESRS Glossary defines ‘GHG removal and storage’: ‘[Anthropogenic] Removals refer to the
withdrawal of GHGs from the atmosphere as a result of deliberate human activities. These include
enhancing biological sinks of CO and using chemical engineering to achieve long-term removal
2
and storage. Carbon capture and storage (CCS) from industrial and energy-related sources, which
alone does not remove CO in the atmosphere, can reduce atmospheric CO2 if it is combined with
2
bioenergy production (BECCS). Removals can be subject to reversals, which are any movement of
stored GHG out of the intended storage that re-enters the surface and atmosphere. For example,
if a forest that was grown to remove a specific amount of CO is subject to a wildfire, the emissions
2
captured in the trees are reversed’.
The provisional agreement for a carbon removals and carbon farming (CRCF) Regulation by the
European Parliament and the Council of the EU reached on 20 February 2024 defines ‘biogenic
carbon pool’ as ‘living biomass, litter, dead wood, dead organic matter, mineral soils and organic
soils as set out in points (a) to (f) of Part B of Annex I to Regulation 2018/841 ...’.
Answer
Based on the GHG Protocol Corporate Standard (version 2004), the Product LCA and Reporting
Standard (version 2011), Agriculture Guidance (version 2014) and Land use, land-use change, and
forestry Guidance for GHG project accounting (version 2006), the following definitions can be
derived.
(a) Biogenic removal and storage refers to GHG removal and storage as defined in ESRS,
which is classified as biogenic. This is produced by living organisms or biological processes
but not by fossilized or from fossil sources. One example is forest restoration. For a
detailed explanation of ‘biogenic’, the undertaking can refer to the GHG Protocol (e.g.
GHG Product LCA and Reporting standard: ‘Biogenic removals are due to the uptake of
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 150 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
CO by biogenic materials during photosynthesis, while non-biogenic removals only occur
2
if CO is removed from the atmosphere by a non-biogenic product during its production
2
or use stage …’.
(b) Removal and storage from land use refers to GHG removal and storage as defined in ESRS
resulting from land-use, which is defined, too, in ESRS (see background). Additionally,
ESRS E1 AR 57 (b) provides examples of such activities (afforestation, reforestation, forest
restoration, urban tree planting, agroforestry, building soil carbon). Also, the undertaking
can refer to the GHG Product LCA and Reporting standard (2011) and the GHG Protocol
for Project Accounting standard (2005) that speaks to GHG removals due to land-use
change.
(c) Technological removal and storage refers to GHG removal and storage as defined in
ESRS, which results from use of technology. Such activities may resemble examples
provided in ESRS E1 AR 57 (b) (direct air capture). The undertaking may refer to Annex A
in the (draft) GHG Protocol Land Sector and Removals Guidance for additional
information.
(d) Hybrid removal and storage refers to GHG removal and storage as defined in ESRS, which
results from combining the use of technology with biogenic removals. ESRS E1 AR 57 (b)
provides an example of this activity (bioenergy with CO2 capture and storage).
Undertakings interested in carbon removals and carbon farming are also advised to check the
provisional agreement reached on 20 February 2024 by the European Parliament and the Council
of the EU for a Carbon Removals and Carbon Farming (CRCF) Regulation.
Question ID 873 – Transport of removed GHGs
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
What is the meaning of, and what is to be reported under, ‘transport of removed GHGs’?
ESRS Reference
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 57 (b)
Key terms
GHG removals; transport
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 151 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 57 states: ‘When disclosing the information on GHG removals and storage
from the undertaking’s own operations and its upstream and downstream value chain required
under paragraphs 56 (a) and 58, for each removal and storage activity, the undertaking shall
describe: …
(b) whether removal and storage are biogenic or from land-use change (e.g. afforestation,
reforestation, forest restoration, urban tree planting, agroforestry, building soil carbon,
etc.), technological (e.g. direct air capture), or hybrid (e.g. bioenergy with CO2 capture
and storage), and technological details about the removal, the type of storage and, if
applicable, the transport of removed GHGs; …’
Answer
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 57 requires a description of ‘technological details about the removal, the
type of storage and, if applicable, the transport of removed GHGs.’ For some removal
technologies (BECS, DACS), transport of the captured GHGs to the storage is necessary. The
technical details of both storage and transportation are included in the technological details
relevant to the GHG removals in this example and shall therefore be reported if applicable. For
an explanation of GHG removals and storage, please see explanation ID 432 Net zero target and
GHG removals.
ESRS E1-9 Anticipated financial effects from material physical and transition
risks and potential climate-related opportunities
Question ID 422 – Assets at risk and disclosure of monetary amount
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Is the disclosure of monetary amount and proportion of assets at risk over the short-/medium-
/long-term meant to be broken down by the time horizon (short-/medium-/long-term) or by a
single aggregate number for assets at risk in any of those time horizons?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 66 and 67, AR 70 and AR 73
Key terms
Assets at risk
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 152 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph 66 states: ‘The disclosure of anticipated financial effects from material physical
risks required by paragraph 64 (a) shall include:
(a) the monetary amount and proportion (percentage) of assets at material physical risk over
the short-, medium- and long-term before considering climate change adaptation actions,
with the monetary amounts of these assets disaggregated by acute and chronic physical
risk …’
ESRS E1 paragraph 67 states: ‘The disclosure of anticipated financial effects from material
transition risks required by paragraph 64 (b) shall include: …
(b) the monetary amount and proportion (percentage) of assets at material transition risk over
the short-, medium- and long-term before considering climate mitigation actions.’
As stated in both articles, the undertaking shall disclose the monetary amount and proportion of
assets at risk considering the different time horizons (short-, medium- and long-term). Guidance
on how to calculate these figures can be found in ESRS E1 paragraph AR 70 to AR 76, which clarify
that the proportion can be done as a single amount or range.
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 70 (a) states: ‘The estimate of monetary amounts and proportion of assets
at physical risk may be presented as either a single amount or range.’
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 73 (a) states: ‘… an estimate of the amount of potentially stranded assets
(in monetary amounts and as a proportion/percentage) from the reporting year until 2030 and
from 2030 to 2050 … may be expressed as a range of asset values based on different climate and
policy scenarios …’.
Answer
ESRS E1 paragraphs 66 and 67 do not require a breakdown of monetary amount figures by the
three time horizons. It rather requires the disclosure of a monetary amount that is the result of
cumulative financial effects assessed for each of the time horizons (short-, medium- and long-
term).
For example, the undertaking shall evaluate the assets at material physical risk considering short-
, medium- and long-term physical climate risks. As the time span increases, the likelihood of
certain climate events impacting the assets is also expected to increase – either because the
events become more frequent or because the period for which they can materialise has become
larger. For this reason, when doing the analysis from the short- to long-term perspective, more
assets are likely to be impacted. These are then accounted for with the carrying value in the
financial statement at the reporting date (ESRS E1 paragraph AR 70), and their carrying value is
added up to a single amount and reported for each of the time horizons (short-, medium- and
long-term). To provide more contextual information, the undertaking may disclose the expected
carrying value of the assets at the time when the climate effect will materialise, taking into
account the amortisation schedule. When identifying the amount and share of current assets that
may be at risk, the time horizons (short-, medium- and long-term) should be considered. If
applying different scenarios or if there is higher uncertainty on assets at risk in the medium- or
long-term, the disclosure can be provided as a range (ESRS E1 paragraphs AR 70 (a) and 73 (a)). A
breakdown by time horizon is not required but may be reported.
When reporting this information, preparers can consider the proportionality principle.
Information on climate-related risks over the long-term is useful for giving direction. However,
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 153 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
while the likelihood of certain climate events can be expected to increase over time, long-term
climate information remains uncertain in varying degrees. It is, therefore, difficult for an
undertaking to anticipate and adapt financially beyond five to ten years both credibly and
verifiably. Consequently, the quality and purpose differ between short-term and long-term
information.
Question ID 555 – Financial effects and climate risk
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Please provide more clarity around the requirement to report the anticipated financial effects
from chronic and acute physical risks in relation to climate change. The CSRD and ESRS language
is not very clear on whether the requirement is to report the financial effects of the expected
damage and loss from chronic and acute physical risk or to simply report the monetary amount
of the values of the assets themselves that are exposed to chronic and acute physical risk.
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraph 66 (a); ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-9
Key terms
Financial materiality; climate risk; financial effects
Background
The question that was originally submitted, which was edited for clarity, is the following: ‘I would
like to ask to provide more clarity around the requirement to report monetary impact from chronic
and acute climate risks. The CSRD and ESRS language is not very clear if the requirement is to
report the monetary impact of the expected damage&loss from chronic and acute aspects, or if it
is simply amount reporting the monetary amount of the values of the assets themselves that see
chronic or acute exposure.’
ESRS E1 paragraph 66 states: ‘The disclosure of anticipated financial effects from material physical
risks required by paragraph 64 (a) shall include … the monetary amount and proportion
(percentage) of assets at material physical risk over the short-, medium- and long-term before
considering climate change adaptation actions, with the monetary amounts of these assets
disaggregated by acute and chronic physical risk.’
The related ESRS E1 paragraph AR 70 states: ‘When preparing the information on assets at
material physical risk that is required to be disclosed under paragraph 66 (a), the undertaking
shall:
(a) calculate the assets at material physical risk in terms of monetary amount and as a
proportion (percentage) of total assets at the reporting date (i.e. the proportion is an
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 154 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
estimate of the carrying value of assets at material physical risk divided by total
carrying value as stated in the statement of financial position or balance sheet). The
estimate of assets at material physical risk shall be derived starting from the assets
recognised in the financial statements ... To contextualise this information, the
undertaking shall:
i. disclose the location of its significant assets at material physical risk. Significant
assets located in the EU territory shall be aggregated by NUTS codes 3 level
digits (Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics). For significant assets
located outside the EU territory, the breakdown by NUTS code will only be
provided where applicable …
(c) to contextualise this information, the undertaking shall: …
ii. disaggregate the monetary amounts of assets at risk by acute and chronic
physical risk.’
The ESRS E1 AR 70 (c) (i) (ii) is consistent with the requirements included in Commission
Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2453 Template 5: Banking book – Climate change physical
risk: Exposures subject to physical risk, which states that ‘Institutions shall disclose the gross
carrying amount of exposures sensitive to impact from chronic climate-change events only,
including hazards relating to gradual changes in weather and climate and having a possible impact
on economic output and productivity [as well as] the gross carrying amount of exposures sensitive
to impact from acute climate change events only, including hazards that may cause sudden
damage to properties, disruption of supply chains, and depreciation of assets [and] the gross
carrying amount subject to impact from both chronic and acute climate change events …’.
Answer
The undertaking is required to report the monetary amount of the assets that are exposed to
impact from chronic and/or acute climate change events. This provides a measure of exposure to
climate risks. The intention is not to report the monetary amount of the expected damage and
loss from the chronic and acute aspects, which would be more complex and uncertain to estimate.
The requirement to disaggregate the monetary amounts of assets by acute and chronic physical
risk (see ESRS E1 paragraph 66 (a)) stems from the requirements detailed by the Commission
Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2453 Template 5: Banking book – Climate change physical
risk: Exposures subject to physical risk (note that this regulation uses the term ‘financial impact’).
This regulation states that the undertaking is required to disclose:
(a) the gross carrying amount of exposures sensitive to impact from chronic climate-change
events;
(b) the gross carrying amount of exposures sensitive to impact from acute climate change
events; and
(c) the gross carrying amount subject to impact from both chronic and acute climate change
events.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 155 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS E2 Pollution
ESRS E2 Pollution
ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 – Description of the
processes to identify and assess material pollution-related impacts, risks
and opportunities
Question ID 245 – Climate-risk analysis
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
What is the relationship between:
(a) impacts, risks and opportunities related to climate change that are to be identified and
assessed in your materiality analysis (ESRS E1 paragraph 20); and
(b) detailed analyses (using scenario analysis) for climate-related impacts, physical risks and
transition risks and opportunities (ESRS E1 paragraph 21)
according to ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirements related to ESRS 2 IRO-1?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 20, 21, AR 9-15
Key terms
Climate-risk analysis
Background
The original question received was the following: ’What is the difference between: …?’
The ESRS distinguish between impacts, risks and opportunities (‘IROs’) of the undertaking, which
are defined in Annex II of the Delegated Act. The undertaking is required to disclose the processes
to identify the IROs and to assess which ones are material (ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement IRO-
1). Consequently, the ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 seeks transparency
on the approach taken to assess its material climate-related IROs.
ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 is conceptually divided into paragraphs
that require describing the processes to assess:
(a) impacts on climate change (ESRS E1 paragraphs 20 (a), AR 9 and AR 10);
(b) climate-related physical risks (ESRS E1 paragraphs 20 (b) and AR 11); and
(c) climate-related transition risks and opportunities (ESRS E1 paragraphs 20 (c) and AR 12).
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 156 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
The ESRS E1 paragraphs 20 (b)(i) and 20 (c)(i) as well as the corresponding AR 11 and AR 12 refer
directly to specific climate scenarios. At the same time, ESRS E1 paragraph 21 requires
information on how climate-scenario analysis was used to inform the identification and
assessment of physical risks and transition risks and opportunities. Additionally, ESRS E1
paragraph AR 13 seeks transparency on how the scenario analysis was used in relation to
disclosures in ESRS E1 paragraphs 19 (ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement SBM-3) as well as ESRS E1
paragraphs 20, 21, AR 10 and AR 11 (ESRS 2 IRO-1). ESRS E1 paragraph AR 15 requires explanation
of how the climate scenarios are compatible with critical assumptions made in the financial
statements. Finally, ESRS E1 paragraph AR 14 provides a reference to existing guidance,
frameworks and standards on scenario analysis.
Annex II to the Delegated Act introduces definitions of impacts, sustainability-related impacts,
risks, sustainability-related risks, material risks, physical risks, climate-related physical risks,
climate-related transition risks, opportunities, material opportunities and climate-related
opportunities.
Answer
Impacts, risks and opportunities related to sustainability matters are assessed for materiality and
reported when material. The identification of material impacts, risks and opportunities is the
outcome of the materiality assessment process.
Paragraphs 20 and 21 of ESRS E1 set the Disclosure Requirements related to the process followed
in order to identify material impacts, risks and opportunities related to climate change that are
to be reported.
Preparing a scenario analysis is not a direct requirement in ESRS E1 per se, but several ESRS E1
disclosures refer to it as a foundation for the information to be disclosed. For instance, when the
undertaking develops climate scenario analysis, its outcome informs the materiality assessment,
particularly for the identification of risks and opportunities (ESRS E1 paragraph 21). It is generally
used to develop the resilience analysis (ESRS E1 paragraph 19).
Scenario analysis involves identifying and evaluating a range of future events and outcomes under
conditions of uncertainty. It deals with the underlying uncertainty in the quantification of the
future value of decision variables for one single scenario as well as with the uncertainty of
different future scenarios. Scenario analysis helps ensure the quality of the information provided.
In ESRS this is reflected in the Disclosure Requirement on processes to identify and assess climate
risks, which requires explanation of whether the assessment of climate-related physical risks
considered at least a high emission climate scenario and whether the assessment of transition
risks considered at least a climate scenario in line with limiting global warming to 1.5°C with no
or limited overshooting. These requirements provide transparency on how the assessment of
physical and transition risks of climate change has been done and help to better understand how
they may impact the undertaking’s business, strategies and financial performance over time.
Question ID 1060 – Pollution – affected communities’ consultations
Release date
November 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 157 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question asked
(1) What does ‘consultation with affected communities’ – in the case of pollution, for
instance – mean in terms of actions?
(2) Could a company be compliant if it states that it has not done it even though its pollution
levels are under control under current law?
ESRS Reference
ESRS E2 paragraph 11 (b)
Key terms
Pollution; affected community; ESRS S3
Background
ESRS E2 paragraph 11 states: ‘The undertaking shall describe the process to identify material
impacts, risks and opportunities and shall provide information on: … (b) whether and how the
undertaking has conducted consultations, in particular with affected communities’.
ESRS 2 paragraph 53 (b) states: ‘(b) an overview of the process to identify, assess, prioritise and
monitor the undertaking’s potential and actual impacts on people and the environment, informed
by the undertaking’s due diligence process, including an explanation of whether and how the
process: …
iii. includes consultation with affected stakeholders to understand how they may be impacted
and with external experts; …’.
EFRAG IG 1 Materiality assessment paragraph 102 states: ‘… Even though the ESRS do not
mandate behaviour, the undertaking is required to disclose whether and how the materiality
assessment process identifies and assesses its impacts, including consultation with affected
stakeholders, to understand how they may be impacted’.
ESRS E4 paragraph 17 (e) states that undertakings: ‘… (ii) … shall disclose how these communities
were involved in the materiality assessment … and (iii) … how negative impacts may be avoided.
If these impacts are unavoidable, the undertaking may indicate its plans to minimise them and
implement mitigation measures that aim to maintain the value and functionality of priority
services’.
ESRS E4 paragraph AR 20 states: ‘… (a) … impacts or benefits created for affected communities,
smallholders, indigenous peoples or other persons in vulnerable situations …’.
ESRS S3 paragraph 21 states: ‘… whether and how the perspectives of affected communities
inform its decisions or activities aimed at managing actual and potential impacts on communities.
This shall include …:
(a) whether engagement occurs with affected communities or their legitimate
representatives directly, or with credible proxies that have insight into their situation;
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 158 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(b) the stage(s) at which engagement occurs, the type of engagement, and the frequency of
the engagement;
(c) the function and the most senior role within the undertaking that has operational
responsibility for ensuring this engagement happens, and that the results inform the
undertaking’s approach;
(d) where applicable, how the undertaking assesses the effectiveness of its engagement with
affected communities, including, where relevant, any agreements or outcomes that
result’.
ESRS S3 paragraph 22 states: ‘… steps it takes to gain insight into the perspectives of affected
communities that may be particularly vulnerable to impacts and/or marginalised, and into the
perspective of specific groups within the affected communities, such as women and girls’.
ESRS S3 paragraph 23 states: ‘Where affected communities are indigenous peoples, the
undertaking shall also disclose how it takes into account and ensures respect of their particular
rights in its stakeholder engagement approach, including their right to free, prior and informed
consent …’.
ESRS S3 paragraph 24 states: ‘If the undertaking cannot disclose the above required information
because it has not adopted a general process to engage with affected communities, it shall
disclose this to be the case. It may disclose a timeframe in which it aims to have such a process in
place’.
Answer
(1) What does ‘consultation with affected communities’ – in the case of pollution, for
instance – mean in terms of actions?
ESRS E2 does not specify the type of actions that an undertaking is to take to consult with affected
communities. In general, the ESRS do not mandate behaviour. However, ESRS 2 requires
transparency on the undertaking’s consultation with affected stakeholders or experts (ESRS 2
paragraph 53 (b)(iii)). This disclosure of ESRS 2 is complemented with ESRS E2 IRO paragraph
11 (b) for the pollution topical standard; therefore, the undertaking is to comply with the IRO-1
specifications in ESRS 2 and ESRS E2 regardless of whether pollution has been assessed as material
by the undertaking. In terms of examples as to how this engagement could be disclosed, ESRS S3-
2 on processes for engaging with affected communities about impacts and ESRS E4 paragraph
17 (e), provides reference points for this datapoint.
(2) Could a company be compliant if it states that it has not done it even though its
pollution levels are under control under current law?
Yes, the undertaking is compliant with ESRS E2 paragraph 11 (b) if it disclosed that it did not
conduct a consultation with affected communities. It is to be noted that the focus of this specific
disclosure requirement is not on legal compliance with regard to pollution levels and it cannot be
considered an exemption to satisfy this requirement. Here, ESRS E2 only requires stating whether
the undertaking conducted consultations with affected communities as input for the pollution-
related materiality assessment. If such consultation process was not adopted, the undertaking is
to state that fact and, optionally, it can also provide a timeframe in which it expects to have a
consultation process in place. Only in the case in which the undertaking did have this consultation
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 159 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
process in place will it also need to explain how it consulted the affected communities on
pollution-related impacts, risks and opportunities.
Supporting material
Implementation Guidance IG 1 Materiality assessment (EFRAG, 2023).
ESRS E2-1 Policies related to pollution
Question ID 186 – Substances of very high concern
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
One of the requirements in the ESRS E2 Pollution Standard is to describe the phase-out of
substances of very high concern (SVHCs). How can undertakings identify SVHCs that are to be
phased out?
ESRS reference
ESRS E2 paragraph 6; Disclosure Requirement E2-1 paragraph 15 (b)
Key terms
Substances of very high concern; SVHCs
Background
Disclosure Requirement E2-1 mandates that the undertaking disclose how its policies address the
substitution and minimisation of substances of concern (SoC) as well as the phase-out of
substances of very high concern (SVHCs) within its own operations and throughout its supply
chain.
The main goal of the EU policies regarding SVHCs is to ensure a high level of protection for human
health and the environment by phasing them out where possible.
As explained in Annex II to Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2772, Substances of Very
High Concern (SVHCs) are those that meet the criteria laid down in Article 57 of Regulation (EC)
No 1907/2006 (REACH) and that were identified in accordance with Article 59 (1) of that
Regulation.
The European Chemical Agency (ECHA) website includes a public registry for intentions, which
lists the intentions and Annex XV restriction proposals received by the ECHA. Once an Annex XV
SVHC dossier has been prepared and the scientific evidence for identifying a substance as a SVHC
has been outlined, a consultation of the Member States and interested parties is required, as
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 160 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
specified in Article 59 of REACH. Further details on this consultation process are available on the
ECHA website at http://echa.europa.eu/proposals-to-identify-substances-of-very-high-concern.
At the end of the process laid down in Article 59 of REACH, the substance may be included in the
Candidate List – which is the list relevant for the identification of SVHCs (please see ID 301).
As the inclusion of substances in the Candidate List results in a number of immediate legal
obligations on listing substances on their own, in mixtures and in articles, it is an indication that
these substances are of concern to authorities and that they might be prioritised for further
regulation.
Answer
The requirement in ESRS E2 paragraph 15 (b) is to indicate whether and how the undertaking’s
policy aligns with the public policy objectives of phasing out SVHCs as outlined in REACH and in
line with the ambitions of the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability.
To identify SVHCs, undertakings consult the Candidate List of Substances of Very High Concern
managed by the European Chemicals Agency pursuant to Article 59 (10) of Regulation (EC) No
1907/2006 (REACH). The Candidate List is provided by the ECHA on its official website and can be
directly consulted by undertakings for information purposes.
Please refer also to explanations ID 226 and ID 301 for further information on Substances of (Very
High) Concern.
ESRS E2-4 Pollution of air, water and soil
Question ID 201 – Oil spills – Chemical spills
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Are oil/chemical spills to be reported under DR E2-4 paragraph 28 or elsewhere?
ESRS reference
ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement E2-4 paragraph 28; ESRS E4 Disclosure requirements IRO-1
paragraph AR 9 (b)(i); ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement SBM-3 paragraph 14 (b); ESRS S2
Disclosure Requirement SBM-3 paragraph 11 (c); ESRS S3 Disclosure Requirement SBM-3
paragraph 9 (b)
Key terms
Oil spill; chemical spill; pollution of air, water and soil; incident
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 161 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement IRO-1 requires undertakings to explain how they determined the
materiality of pollution-related impacts, risks and opportunities.
ESRS 1 paragraph 33 states: ‘When disclosing information on policies, actions and targets in
relation to a sustainability matter that has been assessed to be material, the undertaking shall
include the information prescribed by all the Disclosure Requirements and datapoints in the
topical and sector-specific ESRS related to that matter.’
ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement E2-4 paragraph 28 requires undertakings to disclose pollutants
emitted to air, water and soil.
ESRS E2 paragraph 41 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose any relevant contextual information
including a description of material incidents and deposits whereby pollution had negative impacts
on the environment and/or is expected to have negative effects on the undertaking’s financial
cash flows, financial position and financial performance with short-, medium- and long-term time
horizons.’
ESRS E2 paragraph 28 (a) further addresses disclosures on pollutants by referencing relevant
regulation: ‘disclose the amounts of ... each pollutant listed in Annex II of Regulation (EC) No
166/2006 ... emitted to air, water and soil.’ To this end, the European Pollutant Release and
Transfer Register (E-PRTR) Regulation mentions ‘spilling’ as a particular type of pollutant ‘release’
(Article 2 (10)). Article 5 (2) of E-PRTR Regulation specifies that operators have to ‘include
information on releases and transfers resulting as totals of all deliberate, accidental, routine and
non-routine activities.’
Spills are not, however, an issue addressed by ESRS E2 disclosure only. Under the section
‘Interaction with other ESRS’, ESRS E2 paragraph 7 and 8 make clear its interaction with other
environmental and social topics. As an example, ESRS E2 paragraph 7 (c) indicates ‘Pollution as a
direct impact driver of biodiversity loss’ (ESRS E4) when considering other environmental impacts,
and ESRS E4 (biodiversity and ecosystem) refers to ‘Spills of polluting effluents’ as an example of
policy transition risk (E4-IRO-1 paragraph AR9 (b)(i)).
Oil spills also have social implications, and ‘incidents’ and ‘spills’ are referred to in ESRS S1-SBM-
3 paragraph 14 (b), ESRS S2-SBM-3 paragraph 11 (c), and ESRS S3-SBM-3 paragraph 9 (b). These
paragraphs indicate the requirements to disclose on the social implications of spillages, in
addition to the environmental ones in E2, in alignment with the principle that ESRS mutually
interact with one another.
ESRS 2 paragraph 61 states: ‘The corresponding disclosures shall be located alongside disclosures
prescribed by the relevant ESRS. When a single policy or the same actions address several
interconnected sustainability matters, the undertaking may disclose the required information in
its reporting under one topical ESRS and cross reference to it in its reporting under other topical
ESRS.’
Answer
Where spills can result in material pollution-related impacts, undertakings shall provide
disclosure in accordance with the provisions of ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 162 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
IRO-1 (materiality assessment) and ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement E2-1 (policies), E2-2 (actions)
and E2-3 (targets).
Concerning quantitative information on oil and chemical spills, undertakings shall also disclose
metrics by reporting on chemical releases to air, water and soil as prescribed by ESRS E2
Disclosure Requirement E2-4, referring to the E-PRTR (European Pollutant Release and Transfer
Register) Regulation, which mentions ‘spilling’ as a particular type of pollutant ‘release’ in Art. 2
(10). In this regard, undertakings are also to provide complementary contextual information on
incidents if these had negative environmental impacts and whenever they resulted in, or are
expected to have, (material) financial effects (ESRS Disclosure Requirement E2-6 paragraph 41).
If applicable, undertakings shall develop entity-specific metrics, too, in accordance with ESRS 1
paragraph 11 and ESRS 2 Metrics MDR-M.
Furthermore, spills can have material adverse impacts on water availability, ecosystems and
human health. Therefore, undertakings shall report those impacts in accordance with the relevant
disclosures under ESRS E3, ESRS E4, ESRS S1, ESRS S2, and ESRS S3 if material.
Reporting the impacts of spills under the several aforementioned ESRS topics may result in
undertakings needing to work with different metrics; for example: for pollution, amounts of
pollutants; for biodiversity, metrics that measure changes in the number of individuals of a
species; for own workforce, the number of fatalities or number of days lost to work-related
injuries or ill health; etc. Currently, there are no specific metrics concerning spills in the sector-
agnostic ESRS, nor are there requirements related to the spillage of complex substances that may
trigger pollution through different types of pollutants. The forthcoming sector standards may
develop sector-specific disclosures related to spills.
In terms of the presentation of disclosures, the undertaking can first provide specific information
within the scope of one topical standard (e.g., pollution), then cross-reference this information
to other interconnected topical standards (e.g., ESRS E4, S1) when addressing sustainability
matters that are interconnected (ESRS 2 paragraph 61).
Supporting material
Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 January 2006
concerning the establishment of a European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register.
Question ID 440 - Pollutants emissions – disaggregation
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
The amount of each pollutant to air, water and soil shall be consolidated over the facilities. Does
this mean one single/consolidated value for each pollutant into all categories? Or does this mean
one value for emissions into air, one value for emissions into water and one for emissions into
soil?
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 163 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS E2 paragraphs 28 (a), 29, and AR 22
Key terms
Pollutant disaggregation
Background
ESRS E2-4 paragraph 28 (a) states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the amounts of . . . each
pollutant listed in Annex II of Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 of the European Parliament and of
the Council (European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register “E-PRTR Regulation”) emitted to
air, water and soil, with the exception of emissions of GHGs which are disclosed in accordance
with ESRS E1 Climate Change’.
ESRS E2-4 paragraph 29 states: ‘The amounts referred in paragraph 28 shall be consolidated
amounts including the emissions from those facilities over which the undertaking has financial
control and those over which it has operational control. The consolidation shall include only the
emissions from facilities for which the applicable threshold value specified in Annex II of
Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 is exceeded’.
ESRS E2-4 paragraph AR 22 states: ‘The information required under this Disclosure Requirement
shall be provided at the level of the reporting undertaking. However, the undertaking may
disclose additional breakdown including information at site level or a breakdown of its emissions
by type of source, by sector or by geographical area’.
Regulation (EC) No 166/2006, Article 5 (1)(a) on ‘Reporting by operators’: ‘The operator of each
facility that undertakes one or more of the activities specified in Annex I above the applicable
capacity thresholds specified therein shall report the amounts annually to its competent
authority, along with an indication of whether the information is based on measurement,
calculation or estimation, of . . . releases to air, water and land of any pollutant specified in Annex
II for which the applicable threshold value specified in Annex II is exceeded’.
Answer
In line with the reporting requirements according to the E-PRTR Regulation, undertakings are to
disclose the emissions of each pollutant as separate annual amounts for each environmental
medium, i.e. released to air, released to water and released to soil. Consolidation refers to the
aggregation of pollutant emissions across the different facilities that the undertaking financially
or operationally controls (ESRS E2 paragraph 29). The consolidation shall include only the
emissions from facilities for which the applicable threshold value specified in Annex II of
Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 is exceeded.
The following example illustrates an undertaking that operates two industrial facilities in which
the threshold values specified in Annex II of Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 are exceeded:
Pollutant Releases to air Releases to water Releases to soil/land*
(kg/a) (kg/a) (kg/a)
…
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 164 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Nitrogen oxides xxx - -
(NOx/NO2)
(threshold value
100.000 kg/a)
…
Chlorides (as total Cl) - yyy zzz
(threshold value 2
million kg/a)
…
*Please note that ESRS E2 uses the terms “emissions” and “soil” whereas the E-PRTR-Regulation
uses the terms “releases” and “land”. The terms can be understood interchangeably as regards
the disclosures required by ESRS E2 paragraph 28 (a).
In the example, the nitrogen oxide and chlorides represent the consolidated amount from the two
facilities.
An undertaking may also disclose additional breakdowns of its emissions by type of source, by
sector or by geographical area (ESRS E2 paragraph AR22 and ESRS 1 chapter 3.7 Level of
disaggregation).
Supporting material
Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 January 2006
concerning the establishment of a European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register.
Question ID 441 - Microplastics
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Is the undertaking required to report on microplastics within the facility (‘generated or used’)?
ESRS reference
ESRS Disclosure Requirement E2-4 paragraphs 28 (b), and AR 20
Key terms
Microplastics
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 165 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
ESRS E2-4 paragraph 28 (b) states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the amounts of . . . microplastics
generated or used by the undertaking’.
ESRS E2-4 paragraph AR 20 states: ‘The information to be provided on microplastics under
paragraph 28 (b) shall include microplastics that have been generated or used during production
processes or that are procured, and that leave the undertaking’s facilities as emissions, as
products, or as part of products or services. Microplastics may be unintentionally produced when
larger pieces of plastics like car tires or synthetic textiles wear and tear or may be deliberately
manufactured and added to products for specific purposes (e.g., exfoliating beads in facial or body
scrubs).’
Answer
If material, an undertaking is to provide, as a minimum, information on the microplastics amounts
that it generates or uses. These refer to intentional or unintentional generation or use, both
through production processes and procurement. For reporting purposes, microplastics leaving the
facilities of the undertaking in the form of products, parts of products or services, or emissions
are to be considered. Microplastics that stay within the facilities, that are used in production
processes and that represent inventory used for business processes need not be reported, as they
do not leave the facilities.
Legislation on the matter of microplastics is currently evolving; hence, more defined requirements
may be expected in the future.
Question ID 619 – Air emissions in ESRS E2 versus ESRS E1
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
If the matter of GHG emissions is material, should the undertaking also report under the ESRS E2
in addition to ESRS E1?
ESRS Reference
E2 paragraph 28 (a)
Key terms
Non-GHG emission; ozone-depleting substance; air pollution
Background
To better address the issue pointed out by the submitter, it was agreed to revise the question
received, ‘If I have a material topic regarding GHG emissions, do I need to report under the E2
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 166 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Standard, or is E2 just for non-GHG gases since GHGs are disclosed in accordance with E1 Climate
Change?’ to the question above.
ESRS E2 paragraph 28 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the amounts of … (a) each pollutant …
emitted to air, water and soil, with the exception of emissions of GHGs which are disclosed in
accordance with ESRS E1 Climate Change’. The related footnote (65) refers to information derived
from the Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288, supplementing Regulation (EU)
2019/2088 (SFDR), including ‘indicator #3 in Table II of Annex I (“Emissions of ozone- depleting
substances”)’. ESRS E2, Basis for Conclusions, ‘EU legislation and policies alignment’, paragraph
BC16 specifies that the aforementioned SFRD PAI indicator is a ‘European framework reference’
to be used when disclosing under ESRS E2-4.
ESRS E2 paragraph 7 states: ‘ … to provide a comprehensive overview of what could be material
to pollution, relevant Disclosure Requirements are covered in other environmental Standards as
follows: (a) ESRS E1 Climate change which addresses the following seven greenhouse gases
connected to air pollution: carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O),
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) and nitrogen
trifluoride (NF3)’.
ESRS E1 paragraph 4 states: ‘This Standard covers disclosure requirements related but not limited
to the seven Greenhouse gases (GHG): carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O),
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) and nitrogen
trifluoride (NF3) …’.
While defining ‘Greenhouse Gases (GHG), ESRS Annex II also provides an indication of the source
(Regulation on the Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action) to consult for a detailed
account of GHGs and therefore those that fall under the ESRS E1 domain: ‘The gases listed in Part
2 of Annex V of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council (13).
These include Carbon dioxide (CO2), Methane (CH4), Nitrous Oxide (N2O), Sulphur hexafluoride
(SF6), Nitrogen trifluoride (NF3), Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), Perfluorocarbons (PFCs)’.
ESRS E1 paragraph 8 states: ‘Ozone-depleting substances (ODS), nitrogen oxides (NOX) and
sulphur oxides (SOX), among other air emissions, are connected to climate change but are
covered under the reporting requirements in ESRS E2’.
‘Ozone-depleting substances’ are defined in ESRS Annex II as ‘Substances listed in the Montreal
Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer’. The Montreal Protocol identifies the
individual ‘controlled substances’ with a high ozone-depleting potential (ODP). Such substances
are considered substances of concern (SoC) under ESRS, as per the definition of SoC in Annex II,
which includes, among others, substances that are ‘hazardous to the ozone layer’. SoC are to be
disclosed on across the ESRS E2 Standard (E2-1, E2-2, E2-3, E2-5, E2-6).
The ESRS E2 Basis for Conclusions discusses the consistency with GRI’s metrics on ODS and air
emissions under paragraph BC39 for Disclosure Requirement E2-4 as well as alignment with WHO
Global Air Quality Guidelines, which additionally incorporate fine (‘PM₂.₅’) and inhalable
particulate matter (‘PM₁₀’), Ozone(O₃), nitrogen dioxide (‘NO₂’), Sulphur dioxide (‘SO₂’) and carbon
monoxide (‘CO’), and qualitative good practice statements for certain types of particulate matter.
ESRS E2 paragraph 24 states: ’In addition to ESRS 2 MDR-T, the undertaking may specify whether
ecological thresholds (e.g. the biosphere integrity, stratospheric ozone-depletion, atmospheric
aerosol loading, soil depletion, ocean acidification) and entity-specific allocations were taken into
consideration when setting targets.’
IG 1 Materiality Assessment paragraph 46 states: ‘Once a matter has been identified as material,
the undertaking refers to the DR in the respective topical ESRS to identify the information to be
disclosed on the matter … Similarly, if an undertaking concludes that pollution of water is material,
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 167 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
it shall provide information under the DR in ESRS E2-1 Policies, E2-2 Actions and resources, E2-3
Targets, E2-4 Pollution of air, water and soil and E2-6 Anticipated financial effects from material
polluted-related risks and opportunities’.
Answer
When GHG emissions are material, the undertaking will report them under ESRS E1. If other air
emissions (i.e. non-GHG emissions) are material, then the undertaking will need to report those
under ESRS E2.
Under ESRS, GHGs include seven types, which are CO2, CH4, N2O, SF6, NF3, HFCs, and PFCs. GHG
emissions are covered by ESRS E1 and should therefore be reported in accordance with it. All other
air emissions – including, therefore, non-GHG discharges – are to be reported in accordance with
ESRS E2. Among such air pollutants are ozone-depleting substances (ODS), nitrogen oxides (NOX)
and sulphur oxides (SOX). Undertakings may refer to the E-PRTR for the other air pollutants.
It is to be noted that the reporting of non-GHG emissions is pervasive across all ESRS E2 Disclosure
Requirements (from E2-1 to E2-6).
Supporting material
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 of 6 April 2022 supplementing Regulation (EU)
2019/2088 of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical
standards specifying the details of the content and presentation of the information in relation to
the principle of ‘do no significant harm’.
Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018
on the Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action.
The Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer (1987).
WHO Global Air Quality Guidelines (2021).
Question ID 653 – Microplastics – tires wear
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Shall the amount of microplastic that is generated due to tires wear be reported?
ESRS Reference
ESRS E2 paragraph 28 (b) and AR 20
Key terms
Microplastics; tires wear
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 168 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 11 states: ‘In addition to the disclosure requirements laid down in the three
categories of ESRS, when an undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not
covered or not covered with sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific
facts and circumstances, it shall provide additional entity-specific disclosures to enable users to
understand the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities. Application
requirements AR 1 to AR 5 provide further guidance regarding entity-specific disclosures’.
ESRS 1 paragraph 25 states: ‘Performing a materiality assessment (see sections 3.4 Impact
materiality and 3.5 Financial materiality) is necessary for the undertaking to identify the material
impacts, risks and opportunities to be reported’.
IG 1 Materiality assessment paragraph 27 states: ‘ESRS 1 sets criteria for the materiality
assessment, but not specific thresholds to determine when a matter or information is material or
not. Therefore, the assessment requires the exercise of judgement. The undertaking needs to set
thresholds based on the ESRS 1 criteria as well as its own specific facts and circumstances …’.
ESRS E2-4 paragraph 28 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the amounts of … (b) microplastics
generated or used by the undertaking’.
ESRS E2-4 paragraph AR 20 states: ‘The information to be provided on microplastics under
paragraph 28(b) shall include microplastics that have been generated or used during production
processes or that are procured, and that leave the undertaking’s facilities as emissions, as
products, or as part of products or services. Microplastics may be unintentionally produced when
larger pieces of plastics like car tires or synthetic textiles wear and tear or may be deliberately
manufactured and added to products for specific purposes (e.g. exfoliating beads in facial or body
scrubs).’
IG 2 Value Chain paragraph 185 states for ESRS E2-4: ‘AR 20 refers to procurement of
microplastics’.
Answer
It depends on the outcome of the undertaking’s materiality assessment, including how it applies
appropriate thresholds to determine the information it discloses on metrics (see ESRS 1 paragraph
34).
The materiality assessment of microplastics should cover the whole value chain, including but not
limited to own operations (see also ESRS E2 AR 20), and cover both primary microplastics
(designed to be used in products or manufacturing) and secondary microplastics (generated from
the breakdown of larger plastics, e.g. tires).
If the undertaking identifies microplastics as a material topic in its value chain, e.g. the
downstream value chain, it shall provide, if needed (see ESRS 1 paragraphs 11 and AR 1 to 5),
additional disclosures on an entity-specific basis to enable users to understand its impacts, risks
and opportunities (see also IG 2: Value Chain paragraph 185).
If material, then according to ESRS E2-4 undertakings are to report on the amounts of
microplastics that are unintentionally generated when larger pieces of plastics, such as car tires,
wear and tear.
Please refer to ID 411 Microplastics for further clarifications on the value chain coverage.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 169 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Supporting material
EFRAG IG 1: Materiality assessment implementation guidance (2024).
EFRAG IG 2: Value chain implementation guidance (2024).
Question ID 713 and ID 928 – Microplastics – definition and REACH
update
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Is there any recommended definition/regulation dedicated to microplastics to use in reporting
according to ESRS E2 (e.g. Regulation 2023/2055 amending the REACH)?
ESRS Reference
ESRS E2-4 paragraphs 28(b) and AR 20; Annex II: Acronyms and Glossary of Terms
Key terms
Microplastics; REACH; Regulation 2023/2055
Background
To note: to better address the issues raised by submitters, the questions received, ‘What is the
basis (regulation) for the definition of microplastic. Is there any recommended
definition/regulation dedicated to microplastics to use in reporting according to ESRS E2?’ (ID
928) and ‘Are microplastics defined as in Regulation (EU) 2023/2055 and do they concur with the
regulation?’ (ID 713) have been combined and changed to the question above.
Annex II Glossary and Acronyms of Terms defines ‘microplastics’ as ‘Small pieces of plastics,
usually smaller than 5mm. A growing volume of microplastics is found in the environment,
including the sea, and in food and drinking water. Once in the environment, microplastics do not
biodegrade and tend to accumulate, unless they are specifically designed to biodegrade in the
open environment. Biodegradability is a complex phenomenon, especially in the marine
environment. There are increasing concerns about the presence of microplastics in different
environment compartments (such as water), their impact on the environment and potentially
human health’.
ESRS E2-4 paragraph 28 (b) states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the amounts of … microplastics
generated or used by the undertaking’.
ESRS E2-4 paragraph AR 20 states: ‘The information to be provided on microplastics under
paragraph 28(b) shall include microplastics that have been generated or used during production
processes or that are procured, and that leave the undertaking’s facilities as emissions, as
products, or as part of products or services. Microplastics may be unintentionally produced
when larger pieces of plastics like car tires or synthetic textiles wear and tear or may be
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 170 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
deliberately manufactured and added to products for specific purposes (e.g. exfoliating beads in
facial or body scrubs)’.
Regulation (EU) 2023/2055 (amending the REACH), Annex XVII, entry 78 of Column 1 provides a
definition of ‘Synthetic polymer microparticles’: ‘polymers that are solid and which fulfil both of
the following conditions: (a) are contained in particles and constitute at least 1 % by weight of
those particles; or build a continuous surface coating on particles; (b) at least 1 % by weight of
the particles referred to in point (a) fulfil either of the following conditions: (i) all dimensions of
the particles are equal to or less than 5 mm; (ii) the length of the particles is equal to or less
than 15 mm and their length to diameter ratio is greater than 3. The following polymers are
excluded from this designation: (a) polymers that are the result of a polymerisation process that
has taken place in nature, independently of the process through which they have been extracted,
which are not chemically modified substances; (b) polymers that are degradable as proved in
accordance with Appendix 15; (c) polymers that have a solubility greater than 2 g/L as proved in
accordance with Appendix 16; (d) polymers that do not contain carbon atoms in their chemical
structure’.
Regulation (EU) 2023/2055, recital 18, explains that ‘derogations from the ban on placing on the
market are proposed where the risk from releases is expected to be minimised because synthetic
polymer microparticles are contained by technical means, such as those in chromatography
columns, water filtering cartridges or printer toners, or permanently lose their particle form
because, for example, they swell or form a film, like in diapers, nail polish or paint, or are
permanently enclosed in a solid matrix during end use, such as fibres added to concrete or pellets
used as feedstock for moulded articles’.
Regulation (EU) 2023/2055, Annex XVII, entry 78 of Column 2, paragraphs 4 and 5 clarify the
abovementioned exceptions to the scope of the market ban of certain microplastics: ‘4.
Paragraph 1 shall not apply to the placing on the market of: (a) synthetic polymer microparticles,
as substances on their own or in mixtures, for use at industrial sites; (b) medicinal products within
the scope of Directive 2001/83/EC and veterinary medicinal products within the scope of
Regulation (EU) 2019/6 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*1); (c) EU fertilising
products within the scope of Regulation (EU) 2019/1009 of the European Parliament and of the
Council (*2); (d) food additives within the scope of Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008 of the European
Parliament and of the Council (*3); (e) in vitro diagnostic devices, including devices within the
scope of Regulation (EU) 2017/746 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*4); (f) food
within the meaning of Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 178/2002, not covered by point (d) of this
paragraph, and feed as defined in Article 3(4) of that Regulation. 5. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to
the placing on the market of the following synthetic polymer microparticles, as substances on
their own or in mixtures: (a) synthetic polymer microparticles which are contained by technical
means so that releases to the environment are prevented when used in accordance with the
instructions for use during the intended end use; (b) synthetic polymer microparticles the physical
properties of which are permanently modified during intended end use in such a way that the
polymer no longer falls within the scope of this entry; (c) synthetic polymer microparticles which
are permanently incorporated into a solid matrix during intended end use.’
Regulation (EU) 2023/2055, recital 2, states that ‘A big part of microplastic pollution forms
unintentionally, for example as a result of the breakdown of larger pieces of plastic waste, or the
wear and tear of tyres and road paint, or the washing of synthetic clothes. However, tiny
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 171 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
fragments of synthetic or chemically-modified natural polymers are also manufactured to be
used as such or added to products’.
Answer
The definition of microplastics to use in ESRS reporting is that of the Commission Delegated
Regulation (EU) 2023/2772 (Annex II and Disclosure Requirement ESRS E2-4 paragraph AR 20).
The aspects that are key to the ESRS definition of ‘microplastics’ are size (pieces of plastics, usually
smaller than 5mm), the intentional or unintentional nature of their generation and impacts on
the environment and human health. The definition of microplastics in the ESRS does not reference
the REACH update (Regulation (EU) 2023/2055), which focuses more on the physical definition of
microplastics and provides a more extensive definition (at least 1 % by weight of the particles has:
1. dimensions ≤ 5mm or 2. particle length ≤ 15mm and length/diameter > 3 mm) than the one in
ESRS (particle dimensions ≤ 5mm).
Moreover, the REACH update is related to very specific uses of microplastics intentionally added
to products (REACH restrictions), while there are many other sources of microplastic releases
(both intentional and unintentional) into the environment, which the definition under ESRS
focuses on. Triggering for ESRS reporting are those microplastics that leave the undertaking’s
facilities as emissions, products or parts of products or services, which is when the ESRS stipulate
that they must be reported by the undertaking if material. Microplastics that leave the facilities
as part of products should include those that are released to the environment, either due to wear
and tear by product use (e.g. car tires or synthetic textiles) or due to the fact that they were
manufactured to be added to products for specific purposes (e.g. exfoliating beads in facial or
body scrubs).
Finally, the REACH update presents additional criteria under which microplastics in products are
not to be considered pollutants (mainly referring to the use of microplastics as material input for
certain sectors and polymer characteristics).
It is to be noted that legislation on the matter of microplastics is currently evolving; hence, more
defined requirements may be expected in the future.
Supporting material
Commission Regulation (EU) 2023/2055 of 25 September 2023 amending Annex XVII to Regulation
(EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the Registration,
Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) as regards synthetic polymer
microparticles (Text with EEA relevance).
Question ID 832 – Pollutants emissions – changes over time
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
How can preparers take ‘the changes over time’ into account when disclosing the amounts of
pollutants?
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 172 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS Reference
ESRS E2 paragraph 30 (a)
Key terms
Pollution; microplastics
Background
ESRS E2 paragraph 30 states: ‘The undertaking shall put its disclosure into context and describe:
(a) the changes over time …’.
ESRS E2 paragraph AR 25 states: ‘Where the undertaking’s activities are subject to Directive
2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on industrial emissions (IED) (67) and
relevant Best Available Techniques Reference Documents (BREFs), irrespective of whether the
activity takes place within the European Union or not, the undertaking may disclose the following
additional information’.
ESRS E4 paragraph 38 states: ‘The undertaking may disclose metrics that measure: …
(b) changes over time (e.g. 1 or 5 years) in the management of the ecosystem …’.
ESRS E4 paragraph AR 27 states: ‘When preparing the information required under this Disclosure
Requirement, the undertaking shall consider and may describe:
(a) the methodologies and metrics used and an explanation for why these methodologies and
metrics are selected, as well as their assumptions, limitations and uncertainties, and any
changes in methodologies made over time and why they occurred;...’
ESRS 1 paragraph 77 provides definitions of three main time intervals for the undertaking to adopt:
short-term, corresponding to the ‘reporting period in its financial statements’; medium-term,
lasting ‘from the end of the short-term reporting period … up to 5 years’; and long-term for periods
of ‘more than 5 years’.
ESRS 1 paragraph 74 states: ‘The undertaking shall establish appropriate linkages in its
sustainability statement between retrospective and forward-looking information, when relevant,
to foster a clear understanding of how historical information relates to future-oriented
information’.
ESRS 1 paragraph 83 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose comparative information in respect of
the previous period for all quantitative metrics and monetary amounts disclosed in the current
period.’
ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement SBM-3 paragraph 48 (c) (iii) states that the undertaking shall
disclose ‘the reasonably expected time horizons of the impacts’.
Answer
The undertaking would be reflecting changes over time by disclosing for its quantitative metrics,
at the very least, comparative information in respect to the previous reporting period (see ESRS 1
paragraph 83). In this case, this means that the undertaking would, at the very least, disclose the
amount of pollutants of the current reporting year and the amount of pollutants reported for the
previous year (if reported) to describe changes in the amount. Should the measurement
methodologies or approaches for pollutant quantification have changed regarding the previous
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 173 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
reporting period, the undertaking may describe, if relevant, those methodology changes to help
understand the changes in the amount of pollutants disclosed (as recommended for E4-5
paragraph AR 27 (a)).
In addition, and in more generic terms, when disclosing the amounts of pollutants, preparers shall
consider the ESRS 1 paragraph 77 provision on establishing appropriate linkages with their
sustainability statements between past, present and future information when relevant to allow
for a better understandability of how its historical information relates to current and to future-
oriented information.
As no specific indication is provided on the type of changes that undertakings need to report
regarding pollutants’ emissions, an approach shall be selected that supports understandability
and comparability over time (see ESRS 1 Chapter 2 Qualitative characteristics of information) and
that considers the materiality of the pollution (materiality concept). Additionally, although no
specific example is provided for ESRS Disclosure Requirement E2-4, preparers may consider the
one given under ESRS Disclosure Requirement E4-5 for metrics on biodiversity, which suggests
looking into changes expressed as a variation from one year to the next (short-term) or in five-
year intervals (medium-term).
It is to be noted that the implementation of pollution prevention and pollution control measures,
and the adoption of BATs, can lead to significant changes over time of the amounts, types and
form of pollutant releases which provide relevant contextual information to the disclosure of
metrics.
ESRS E2-5 Substances of concern and substances of very high concern
Question ID 226 and 301– Substances of (very high) concern and
hazard classes
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
(1) What is the difference between ‘substances of concern’ (SoCs) and ‘substances of very
high concern’ (SVHCs) in ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement E2-5?
(2) What are the lists of substances of concern (SoC) and substances of very high concern
(SVHCs) to be considered?
(3) What are their respective main hazard classes?
ESRS reference
ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement E2-5 paragraph 34; Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms:
‘Substances of Concern (SoC)’ and ‘Substances of Very High Concern (SVHCs)’
Key terms
Substances of concern; SoC; substances of very high concern; SVHC
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 174 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
ID 226 and 301 were both on Substances of (Very High) Concern. As they have related answers,
they were combined in the questions above. To better answer the questions addressed by the
submitters, it was agreed to change the questions received from ID 226 ‘What is the difference
between ‘substances of concern’ and ‘substances of very high concern’ in ESRS E2 Disclosure
Requirement E2-5?’ and ID 301 ‘What is the list of substances of high concern to be considered?
Is the list of substances of Very High Concern the one in Annex XIV of REACH? What are the main
hazard classes of substances of concern and very high concern that must be considered for
reporting under paragraph 34?’ to the questions above.
As per Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms, a substance of concern (SoC) is a ‘substance that
meets at least one of three criteria:’
(1) ‘meets the criteria laid down in Article 57 and is identified in accordance with Article 59
(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council
(REACH) – this group of substances corresponds to Substances of Very High Concern;
(2) is classified in Part 3 (which lists hazardous substances for which harmonised
classification and labelling have been established at Community level) of Annex VI
(Harmonised classification and labelling for certain hazardous substances) to Regulation
(EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Regulation on
classification, labelling and packaging (CLP) of substances) in one of the following hazard
classes or hazard categories:
(a) carcinogenicity categories 1 and 2;
(b) germ cell mutagenicity categories 1 and 2;
(c) reproductive toxicity categories 1 and 2;
(d) endocrine disruption for human health;
(e) endocrine disruption for the environment;
(f) Persistent, Mobile and Toxic or Very Persistent, Very Mobile properties;
(g) Persistent, Bioaccumulative and Toxic or Very Persistent, Very Bioaccumulative
properties;
(h) respiratory sensitisation category 1;
(i) skin sensitisation category 1;
(j) chronic hazard to the aquatic environment categories 1 to 4;
(k) hazardous to the ozone layer;
(l) specific target organ toxicity, repeated exposure categories 1 and 2;
(m) specific target organ toxicity, single exposure categories 1 and 2;
(3) or negatively affects the re-use and recycling of materials in the product in which it is
present, as defined in relevant Union product-specific ecodesign requirements.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 175 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
The ESRS Glossary defines substances of very high concern (SVHCs) as substances ‘that meet the
criteria laid down in Article 57 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 (REACH)’ and that are ‘identified
in accordance with Article 59 (1) of that Regulation’.
Following Article 57 of REACH, the substances described below may be identified as SVHC:
(a) under the Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 (CLP) as: (a) carcinogenic of category 1A and 1B;
(b) mutagenic category 1A and 1B; (c) toxic for reproduction category 1A and 1B;
(b) under Annex XIII of REACH as: d) persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic; e) very persistent
and very bioaccumulative;
(c) other substances for which there is scientific evidence of probable serious effects to
human health or the environment, which give rise to an equivalent level of concern to
those other substances listed above, and which are identified on a case-by-case basis,
such as those having endocrine disrupting properties.
The list that is relevant for the identification of SVHCs is the ‘Candidate List of substances of very
high concern for Authorisation’, which compiles the list of substances that are potential
candidates for inclusion in Annex XIV (Authorisation list).
Concerning SoCs, these will include the SVHCs in the lists above (criterion 1) as well as all
substances corresponding to criterion 2 – but for which, at this stage, a comprehensive list cannot
be presented. Nevertheless, substances regulated under CLP would have information that could
allow their assessment as being SoCs. Furthermore, ECHA provides a database to filter Annex VI
by specific hazard classes: the C&L Inventory. As to criterion 3, it is still not yet fully regulated and,
hence, there is currently no specific list of chemicals for these criteria. However, ESRS 1 paragraph
11 states that ‘… when an undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not covered
or not covered with sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific facts and
circumstances, it shall provide additional entity-specific disclosures to enable users to understand
the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities.’ Additionally, existing
standard product specification from CEN/CENELEC, academic literature or other sources could
provide valuable guidance to assess the risks of use of certain substances in products that may
potentially fall within criterion 3; nonetheless, no list can be provided at this stage.
Answer
(1) What is the difference between ‘substances of concern’ (SoCs) and ‘substances of very
high concern’ (SVHCs) in ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement E2-5?
As per the ESRS Glossary in Annex II of the Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2772,
Substances of Concern constitute a broader group of substances, including:
(a) the Substances of Very High Concern meeting the criteria laid down in Art. 57 and 59 of
the REACH regulation;
(b) the substances classified in one of the hazard classes or hazard categories, as per point
(ii) of the definition of SoC in the ESRS Glossary (see 'Background' information), and as
listed in Part 3 (Table 3.1) of Annex VI of CLP;
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 176 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(c) and substances that negatively affect the reuse and recycling of materials in the products
in which they are present, as defined in the relevant EU product-specific ecodesign
requirements (forthcoming).
(2) What are the lists of substances of concern (SoC) and substances of very high concern
(SVHC) to be considered?
The list of substances covered by point (a) is available by consulting the ‘Candidate List of
substances of very high concern for Authorisation’ managed by the European Chemicals Agency
(ECHA), pursuant to Article 59 (10) of the REACH Regulation.
The list of substances covered by point (b) is available by consulting the table of harmonised
entries in Annex VI to CLP, containing all updates3 to the harmonised classification and labelling
of hazardous substances, which are available in Table 3 of Annex VI to the CLP Regulation,
managed by the ECHA. The ECHA also provides a database (C&L Inventory) to filter Annex VI by
specific hazard classes.
As for point (c), currently there are no Union product-specific ecodesign requirements available;
hence, there are no published lists for these substances. Nonetheless, undertakings are to follow
ESRS 1 indications on entity-specific disclosures should they conclude that a related impact, risk
or opportunity is material although not explicitly covered by the ESRS.
(3) What are their respective main hazard classes?
Undertakings may refer to the regulatory sources – the REACH and CLP regulations – to identify
information on the definitions and lists of substances as well as for further indications on hazard
classes. Please also see background information.
Please also refer to explanations ID 186 and ID 226 for further information on Substances of (Very
High) Concern.
Lastly, please also refer to ID 186 for further information on Substances of (Very High) Concern.
Supporting material
Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December
2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals
(REACH).
Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December
2008 on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures (CLP).
3 Please note that the most recent updates made to Table 3 of Annex VI to CLP are not necessarily
already included in the most recent consolidated version of CLP but can be found in the respective
Commission Delegated Regulations amending that Table.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 177 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question ID 648 – Substances of (very high) concern – including
entity-specific disclosures
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
If a company sells articles containing substances of (very high) concern, shall the total amounts
of products containing those substances or the total amounts of substances within those products
be reported?
ESRS Reference
ESRS paragraph 34
Key terms
Substances of concern; substances of very high concern; SoC; SVHC
Background
To better address the issue addressed by the submitter, it was agreed to change the question
received from ‘If a company sells articles containing substances of concern and substances of very
high concern, shall the total amount of the products containing those substances be reported or
the total amount of the substances within those products?’ to the question above.
E2-5 paragraph 34 concerns the production and procurement of substances of concern, including
when these leave the facilities of the manufacturing undertaking as products as well as ‘… total
amounts of substances of concern that are generated or used during the production or that are
procured, and the total amounts of substances of concern that leave its facilities as emissions, as
products, or as part of products or services split into main hazard classes of substances of
concern’.
E2-5 paragraph 32 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose information on the production, use,
distribution, commercialisation and import/export of substances of concern and substances of
very high concern, on their own, in mixtures or in articles’.
ESRS 1 paragraph 11 states: ‘In addition to the disclosure requirements laid down in the three
categories of ESRS, when an undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not
covered or not covered with sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific
facts and circumstances, it shall provide additional entity-specific disclosures to enable users to
understand the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities. Application
requirements AR 1 to AR 5 provide further guidance regarding entity-specific disclosures’.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 178 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Answer
The undertaking is in any case required to provide information on the total amounts of substances
of concern within those products if it concludes that pollution is material. In addition, depending
on its specific circumstances, the undertaking may conclude that it is also material to disclose the
amounts of products containing such substances.
Under ESRS E2-5 paragraph 34, the undertaking that produces, uses, distributes, commercialises
and imports/exports substances of concern and substances of very high concern on their own, in
mixtures or in articles shall disclose ‘the total amounts of substances of concern that are
generated or used during the production or that are procured, and the total amounts of
substances of concern that leave its facilities as emissions, as products, or as part of products or
services split into main hazard classes of substances of concern.’
Nonetheless, if the undertaking concludes that additional entity-specific metrics (including in
connection to its value chain) are needed due to the related impacts, risks or opportunities not
being covered or not being covered with sufficient granularity by the required metric in ESRS E2-
5 and that these entity-specific metrics are related to the total amount of products containing
substances of concern and substances of very high concern, then it has to include also that
information in its reporting.
Question ID 815 – Substances of concern – in articles
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
The current EU legislation requires to monitor substances of concern in chemicals but not in
articles. If no (or only partial) information (including due to suppliers’ lack of responsiveness) is
available on substances of concern contained in the manufactured articles, what should the
company disclose?
ESRS Reference
E2 paragraphs 15, 34-35, AR 13, AR 19, and AR 28; ESRS 1 paragraphs 34 and 71
Key terms
Substances of concern; SoC
Background
E2 paragraph 15 states: ‘The undertaking shall indicate, with regard to its own operations and its
upstream and downstream value chain, whether and how its policies address the following areas
where material …
(b) substituting and minimising the use of substances of concern; and …’.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 179 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS E2 paragraph 34 states: ‘The disclosure required by paragraph 32 shall include the total
amounts of substances of concern that are generated or used during the production or that are
procured, and the total amounts of substances of concern that leave its facilities as emissions, as
products, or as part of products or services split into main hazard classes of substances of concern.’
ESRS E2 paragraph 35 states: ‘The undertaking shall present separately the information for
substances of very high concern.’
ESRS E2 paragraph AR 13 states: ‘Where actions extend to upstream or downstream value chain
engagements, the undertaking shall provide information on the types of actions reflecting these
engagements.’
ESRS E2 paragraph AR 19 states: ‘The targets may cover the undertaking’s own operations and/or
the value chain.’
ESRS E2 paragraph AR 28 states: ‘In order for the information to be complete, substances in the
undertaking’s own operations and those procured shall be included (e.g. embedded in ingredients,
semi-finished products, or the final product).’
ESRS 1 paragraph 71 states: ‘With reference to policies, actions and targets, the undertaking’s
reporting shall include upstream and/or downstream value chain information to the extent that
those policies, actions and targets involve actors in the value chain. With reference to metrics, in
many cases, in particular for environmental matters for which proxies are available, the
undertaking may be able to comply with the reporting requirements without collecting data from
the actors in its upstream and downstream value chain, especially from SMEs, for example, when
calculating the undertaking’s GHG Scope 3 emissions’.
ESRS 1 paragraph 34 states: ‘When disclosing information on metrics for a material sustainability
matter according to the Metrics and Targets section of the relevant topical ESRS, the
undertaking: …
(b) may omit the information prescribed by a datapoint of a Disclosure Requirement if it
assesses such information to be not material and concludes that such information is not
needed to meet the objective of the Disclosure Requirement.’
Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 (REACH), Article 3 defines ‘article’ as 'an object which during
production is given a special shape, surface or design which determines its function to a greater
degree than does its chemical composition’. Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 (REACH), Article 33 on
the ‘Duty to communicate information on substances in articles’ states: ‘1. Any supplier of an
article containing a substance meeting the criteria in Article 57 and identified in accordance with
Article 59(1) in a concentration above 0,1 % weight by weight (w/w) shall provide the recipient of
the article with sufficient information, available to the supplier, to allow safe use of the article
including, as a minimum, the name of that substance. 2. On request by a consumer, any supplier
of an article containing a substance meeting the criteria in Article 57 and identified in accordance
with Article 59(1) in a concentration above 0,1 % weight by weight (w/w) shall provide the
consumer with sufficient information, available to the supplier, to allow safe use of the article
including, as a minimum, the name of that substance’.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 180 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Answer
If substances of concern (and/or substances of very high concern) in articles represent a material
topic for the undertaking:
(a) for the metrics disclosure of ESRS E2 paragraphs 34 and 35, the undertaking shall consider
both those within its production processes as well as the ones entering its own operations
through procurement as an ingredient, semi-finished products, or final products. If the
metric cannot be determined through direct data collection, e.g. by obtaining it from
suppliers, after making a reasonable effort to do so, it shall be estimated by using proxies.
Reference is made to ‘ID 504 – Disclosure Requirements on material metrics when
information is not available; and
(b) the undertaking shall, in any case, report on the related policies, actions and targets
(PAT) it has in place in relation to the material topic. ESRS E2 provides in particular specific
indications on the extension of the reporting under the PAT to the value chain.
Concerning policies, the undertaking must disclose whether and how its policies support
the substitution and minimisation of the use of substances of concern. This information
is to be provided also for its upstream and downstream value chain. With regard to
actions, undertakings shall report on upstream and downstream value chain
engagements when present. The extension of targets to value chain entities is, however,
optional.
Concerning the specific case of substances of very high concern (SVHC) in articles, Regulation (EC)
No 1907/2006 (REACH) requires communicating SVHC content where specific thresholds are
exceeded.
To note: Information to be collected from value chain entities can be omitted during a three-year
phase-in period if certain conditions are met in accordance with ESRS 1 Chapter 10.2 Transitional
provision related to Chapter 5 Value chain, unless it is prescribed under EU legislation.
See [Draft] Question 29 ESRS require undertakings to use estimates if they cannot obtain all
necessary value chain information after having made reasonable efforts to do so (ESRS 1 General
requirements paragraph 69). What constitutes ‘reasonable effort’? from the European
Commission on the interpretation of certain legal provisions in Directive 2013/34/EU (Accounting
Directive).
Supporting material
Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December
2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals
(REACH).
ESRS E2-6 Anticipated financial effects from pollution-related impacts, risks
and opportunities
Question ID 472 – Major incidents and deposits
Release date
November 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 181 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question asked
When are incidents and deposits considered to be ‘major’? Is there a qualitative or quantitative
threshold to consider?
ESRS reference
ESRS E2 paragraph 40 (b)
Key terms
Anticipated financial effect; major incident; deposit
Background
ESRS E2 paragraph 38 states: ‘The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an
understanding of:
(a) anticipated financial effects due to material risks arising from pollution-related impacts
and dependencies and how those risks have (or could reasonably be expected to have) a
material influence on the undertaking’s financial position, financial performance, and
cash flows, over the short-, medium- and long term- …’.
ESRS E2 paragraph 39 states: ‘The disclosure shall include:
(a) a quantification of the anticipated financial effects in monetary terms before considering
pollution-related actions, or where not possible without undue cost or effort, qualitative
information.’
ESRS E2 paragraph 40 states: ‘The information provided under paragraph 39 (a) shall include …
(b) operating and capital expenditures incurred in the reporting period in conjunction with
major incidents and deposits’.
ESRS E2 paragraph 15 states: ‘The undertaking shall indicate, with regard to its own operations
and its upstream and downstream value chain, whether and how its policies address the following
areas where material … (c) avoiding incidents and emergency situations’.
ESRS E2 paragraph 41 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose any relevant contextual information
including a description of material incidents and deposits whereby pollution had negative impacts
on the environment and/or is expected to have negative effects on the undertaking’s financial
cash flows, financial position and financial performance with short-, medium- and long-term time
horizons’.
The Industrial Emissions Directive, recital 16, stipulates that ‘The impact of pollution, including
when caused by incidents or accidents, can extend beyond the territory of a Member State. In
such cases, without prejudice to Directive 2012/18/EU of the European Parliament and of the
Council (9), limiting the consequences for human health and the environment of incidents or
accidents and preventing further possible incidents or accidents requires prompt exchange of
information and close coordination between the competent authorities of the Member States
which are or could be affected by such events. Therefore, in the event of any incident or accident
significantly affecting the environment or human health in another Member State, exchange of
information and transboundary and multidisciplinary cooperation between the affected Member
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 182 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
States should be fostered to limit the consequences for the environment and human health and
to prevent further possible incidents or accidents’.
The Industrial Emissions Directive, Article 7(b), adds that ‘in the event of any incident or accident
significantly affecting the environment …the operator immediately takes the measures to limit the
consequences for human health or the environment and to prevent further possible incidents or
accidents’.
The Seveso-III Directive, Article 3, paragraph 13 defines a major accident as ‘an occurrence such
as a major emission, fire, or explosion resulting from uncontrolled developments in the course of
the operation of any establishment covered by this Directive, and leading to serious danger to
human health or the environment, immediate or delayed, inside or outside the establishment,
and involving one or more dangerous substances’.
Answer
ESRS do not provide a threshold for distinguishing major incidents and deposits from regular
occurrences. The evaluation of incidents should, in all cases, be based on the undertaking’s
materiality assessment and incidents identified as major are likely connected to material impacts
and risks and, therefore, likely to be identified as material. At the same time, incidents of lower
scale can carry material impacts or financial risks and, therefore, be assessed by the undertaking
as material, too.
It is also to be noted that based on the provisions of materiality of information of ESRS 1
paragraph 34, the disclosure of operating and capital expenditures incurred in the reporting
period, in conjunction with major incidents and deposits as required by ESRS E2 paragraph 40 (b),
depends more on whether the expenditures are financially material and not on what kind of
major incidents or deposits caused them.
The undertaking may also need to consider the provisions in the Seveso-III Directive on major
accidents as well as those in the IED 2.0 on incidents and accidents that significantly affect the
environment. The IED stipulates in particular that incidents or accident may significantly affect
the environment and may become a national matter or even extend beyond national borders.
The Seveso-III Directive (used in the development of ESRS E2) explicitly defines major accidents
and includes examples that can be considered for reporting. In the cases in which an
undertaking’s incidents or accidents fall within the scope of major or significant incidents or
accidents according to existing law (i.e. IED 2.0 and Seveso-III Directive), such incidents and
accidents would also be considered as major incidents according to ESRS. Should any of the
undertaking’s facilities or installations not be covered by the IED 2.0 or the Seveso-III Directive,
the undertaking can nonetheless consider the definitions provided in those Directives when
applying its materiality assessment.
Supporting material
Directive (EU) 2024/1785 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 April 2024
amending Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on industrial
emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control) and Council Directive 1999/31/EC on the
landfill of waste (IED 2.0).
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 183 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Directive 2012/18/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on the control
of major-accident hazards involving dangerous substances (Seveso-III Directive).
Best Available Techniques (BAT) Reference Document for Waste Treatment, EC (2018).
ESRS E3 Water and marine resources
ESRS E3 Water and marine resources
ESRS E3-1 – Policies related to water and marine resources
Question ID 456 – Policies on water treatment
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
What is the meaning of water treatment ‘as a step towards more sustainable sourcing of water’?
ESRS Reference
ESRS E3 paragraph 12 (a) (ii)
Key terms
Water management; water policies; water treatment
Background
ESRS E3 paragraph 12 states: ‘The undertaking shall indicate whether and how its policies address
the following matters where material:
(a) water management including: …
ii. water treatment as a step towards more sustainable sourcing of water; …’
In Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms wastewater is defined as ‘Water which is of no further
immediate value to the purpose for which it was used or in the pursuit of which it was produced
because of its quality, quantity, or time of occurrence. Wastewater from one user can be a
potential supply to a user elsewhere …’.
US EPA Guidelines for Water Reuse reads: ‘Direct potable reuse (DPR): The introduction of
reclaimed water (with or without retention in an engineered storage buffer) directly into a
drinking water treatment plant, either collocated or remote from the advanced wastewater
treatment system. Indirect potable reuse (IPR): Augmentation of a drinking water source (surface
or groundwater) with reclaimed water followed by an environmental buffer that precedes
drinking water treatment. Nonpotable reuse: All water reuse applications that do not involve
potable reuse. Potable reuse: Planned augmentation of a drinking water supply with reclaimed
water … Water reuse: The use of treated municipal wastewater (reclaimed water) … Reclaimed
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 184 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
water: Municipal wastewater that has been treated to meet specific water quality criteria with
the intent of being used for a range of purposes. The term recycled water is synonymous with
reclaimed water. Water reclamation: The act of treating municipal wastewater to make it
acceptable for reuse.’
Regulation 2020/741/EU on minimum requirements for water reuse, paragraph (2), reads: ‘The
Union’s ability to respond to the increasing pressures on water resources could be improved by
wider reuse of treated waste water, limiting extraction from surface water bodies and
groundwater bodies, reducing the impact of discharge of treated waste water into water bodies,
and promoting water savings through multiple uses for urban waste water, while ensuring a high
level of environmental protection. ’
Paragraph (6) states: ‘In its communication of 2 December 2015 “Closing the loop – An EU action
plan for the Circular Economy”, the Commission committed to taking a series of actions to
promote the reuse of treated waste water, including the development of a legislative proposal
on minimum requirements for water reuse.’
Paragraph (9) states: ‘Reuse of properly treated waste water, for example from urban waste
water treatment plants, is considered to have a lower environmental impact than other
alternative water supply methods, such as water transfers or desalination.’
The definition in Article 3 of ‘reclaimed water’ reads as follows: ‘(4) “reclaimed water” means
urban waste water that has been treated in compliance with the requirements set out in Directive
91/271/EEC and which results from further treatment in a reclamation facility in accordance with
Section 2 of Annex I to this Regulation …’.
Directive 91/271/EEC on urban waste water treatment, Article 2, reads: ‘For the purpose of this
Directive:
7. “primary treatment” means treatment of urban waste water by a physical and/or chemical
process involving settlement of suspended solids, or other processes in which the BOD5 of the
incoming waste water is reduced by at least 20 % before discharge and the total suspended solids
of the incoming waste water are reduced by at least 50 %;
8. “secondary treatment” means treatment of urban waste water by a process generally involving
biological treatment with a secondary settlement or other process in which the requirements
established in Table 1 of Annex I are respected;
9. “appropriate treatment” means treatment of urban waste water by any process and/or
disposal system which after discharge allows the receiving waters to meet the relevant quality
objectives and the relevant provisions of this and other Community Directives …’.
The Circular Economy Action Plan 2020 states: ‘The new Water Reuse Regulation will encourage
circular approaches to water reuse in agriculture. The Commission will facilitate water reuse and
efficiency, including in industrial processes.’
In its article ‘Sustainability in Water Supply’, the International Water Association Publishing writes
on reclaimed water: ‘Reclaimed water, or water recycled from human use, can also be a
sustainable source of water supply. It is an important solution to reduce stress on primary water
resources such as surface and groundwater’.
Answer
There is no definition of water treatment or of sustainable sourcing of water in the Annex II
Acronyms and Glossary of terms. However, in the definition of wastewater the concept of water
reuse is introduced: ‘Wastewater from one user can be a potential supply to a user elsewhere’.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 185 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Only the use by external users is explicitly mentioned, while the possibility of internal reuse in the
undertaking’s own operation may also exist but is not made explicit. Even if not explicit in the
ESRS definition, wastewater in most cases will have to undergo treatment before it can be used
for a different purpose or reused for the same purpose.
Water treatment encompasses physical, chemical and biological treatments operated on water
outputs (or inputs) with the purpose of meeting adequate quality for a certain use, process or
destination, such as drinking water quality level, preparation for another use (industrial,
agricultural) or the discharge back to the natural environment.
Therefore, ESRS E3 paragraph 12 (a) (ii) should be read under the assumption that policies on
water treatment can promote water reuse as a sustainable source of water. In these terms, water
treatment can increase the sustainability of water management practices and, more specifically,
water sourcing to the extent that it can reduce the need for water withdrawal and therefore the
pressure on the water environment. It can also improve the quality of water discharges,
increasing the availability of high-quality, safe water for withdrawal and ecological functions. The
practice can more broadly be seen as an application of circular economy principles to water
management.
Supporting material
US EPA Guidelines for Water Reuse, 2012
Regulation 2020/741/EU on minimum requirements for water reuse
Directive 91/271/EEC on urban waste water treatment
Circular Economy Action Plan, 2020
Sustainability in Water Supply | IWA Publishing
ESRS E3-4 – Water consumption
Question ID 455 – Contextual information and consolidated data for
water consumption
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Since it is not feasible to provide water consumption data and all the contextual information
needed for 200-300 sites in one report, how should contextual information for 200-300 sites be
provided?
ESRS Reference
ESRS E3 paragraph 28
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 186 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Key terms
Water consumption; consolidated data; multiple sites
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 31 states: ‘The applicable information prescribed within a Disclosure
Requirement, including its datapoints, or an entity-specific disclosure shall be disclosed when the
undertaking assesses, as part of its assessment of material information, that the information is
relevant from one or more of the following perspectives:
(a) the significance of the information in relation to the matter it purports to depict or explain;
or
(b) the capacity of such information to meet the users’ decision-making needs, including the
needs of primary users of general-purpose financial reporting described in paragraph 48
and/or the needs of users whose principal interest is in information about the undertaking’s
impacts.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 34 states: ‘When disclosing information on metrics for a material sustainability
matter according to the Metrics and Targets section of the relevant topical ESRS, the undertaking:
(a) shall include the information prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement if it assesses such
information to be material; and
(b) may omit the information prescribed by a datapoint of a Disclosure Requirement if it
assesses such information to be not material and concludes that such information is not
needed to meet the objective of the Disclosure Requirement.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 54 states: ‘When needed for a proper understanding of its material impacts,
risks and opportunities, the undertaking shall disaggregate the reported information: (a) by
country, when there are significant variations of material impacts, risks and opportunities across
countries and when presenting the information at a higher level of aggregation would obscure
material information about impacts, risks or opportunities; or (b) by significant site or by
significant asset, when material impacts, risks and opportunities are highly dependent on a
specific location or asset.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 56 states: ‘Where data from different levels, or multiple locations within a level,
is aggregated, the undertaking shall ensure that this aggregation does not obscure the specificity
and context necessary to interpret the information. The undertaking shall not aggregate material
items that differ in nature.’.
ESRS 1 paragraph QC. 1 states: ‘Sustainability information is relevant when it may make a
difference in the decisions of users under a double materiality approach (see Chapter 3 of this
Standard).’
ESRS 1 pargraph QC. 5 states: ‘To be useful, the information must not only represent relevant
phenomena, it must also faithfully represent the substance of the phenomena that it purports to
represent. Faithful representation requires information to be (i) complete, (ii) neutral and (iii)
accurate.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 187 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS 2 paragraph 77 states: ‘For each metric, the undertaking shall: (a) disclose the methodologies
and significant assumptions behind the metric, including the limitations of the methodologies
used.’
ESRS E3 paragraph 26 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose information on its water
consumption performance related to its material impacts, risks and opportunities.’
ESRS E3 paragraph 28 states: ‘The disclosure required by paragraph 26 relates to own operations
and shall include:
(a) total water consumption in m3;
(b) total water consumption in m3 in areas at water risk, including areas of high-water stress;
(c) total water recycled and reused in m3;
(d) total water stored and changes in storage in m3; and
(e) any contextual information necessary regarding points (a) to (d), including the water basins’
water quality and quantity, how the data have been compiled, such as any standards,
methodologies, and assumptions used, including whether the information is calculated,
estimated, modelled, or sourced from direct measurements, and the approach taken for
this, such as the use of any sector-specific factors.’
ESRS E3 paragraph AR 1 states: ‘When conducting a materiality assessment on environmental
subtopics, the undertaking shall assess the materiality of water and marine resources in its own
operations and its upstream and downstream value chain, and may consider the four phases
below, also known as the LEAP approach: (a) Phase 1: locate where in its own operations and
along the value chain the interface with nature takes place …’.
Answer
ESRS E3 paragraph 28 requires the disclosure of water consumption related to own operations
and related contextual information. It is expected that all sites and their contextual information
are considered in the materiality assessment. The disclosures on water consumption and
contextual information shall be reported for the entire group and can be aggregated for all or for
multiple sites.
The undertaking can aggregate information, according to ESRS 1 paragraph 56, under the
condition that the aggregation does not obscure the specificity and context necessary to interpret
the information. The undertaking shall not aggregate material items that differ in nature. It is up
to the undertaking to decide the best way to do that aggregation, so as to not to obscure material
information and meet the qualitative characteristics of information as per ESRS 1 paragraph 19.
If an aggregated presentation fails to portray, in alignment with the qualitative characteristics of
information, the profile of water consumption of the group, the information shall be
disaggregated for material sites (or assets) in accordance with ESRS 1, paragraph 54(b). The
information to be disaggregated may refer to the water consumption metric, contextual
information or both.
As an example, an undertaking with several (e.g. one hundred) facilities in different water basins
may provide contextual information (e.g. in percentages) on how many of its facilities are located
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 188 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
in areas of high-water stress and how this is the underlying factor driving water consumption as a
material matter, as the risk of water droughts becoming more frequent can lead to more frequent
production stoppages constraining future production capacity. It may also have to provide the
location of facilities in areas of high-water stress or of areas of high-water stress where the
relevant facilities are located, if material.
The above answer does not address the omission of immaterial amounts, which is covered in
principle in ID 148 Scope of consolidation for non-EU and unconsolidated subsidiaries in relation
to immaterial subsidiaries.
Question ID 526 and ID 1021 – Disclosure of a non-material
datapoint (water-consumption in own operations) related to a (a)
material and (b) non-material topic
Question ID 526 and ID 1021 – Disclosure of a non-material datapoint (water-consumption in own
operations) related to a (a) material and (b) non-material topic
Question ID 676 – Water metrics in the value chain
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Can undertakings report different metrics related to the same sustainability matter in different
parts of the value chain depending on the nature of the impact, for example water withdrawal for
own operations and water consumption for upstream value chain?
ESRS Reference
ESRS E3-4 paragraph 28 (a) and (b) and AR 32
Key terms
Value chain metrics; water metrics; water withdrawal; water consumption
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 11 states: ‘In addition to the disclosure requirements laid down in the three
categories of ESRS, when an undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not
covered or not covered with sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific
facts and circumstances, it shall provide additional entity-specific disclosures to enable users to
understand the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities. Application
requirements AR 1 to AR 5 provide further guidance regarding entity-specific disclosures.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 63 states: ‘The information about the reporting undertaking provided in the
sustainability statement shall be extended to include information on the material impacts, risks
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 189 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
and opportunities connected with the undertaking through its direct and indirect business
relationships in the upstream and/or downstream value chain (“value chain information”). In
extending the information about the reporting undertaking, the undertaking shall include
material impacts, risks and opportunities connected with its upstream and downstream value
chain:
(a) following the outcome of its due diligence process and of its materiality assessment; and
(b) in accordance with any specific requirements related to the value chain in other ESRS.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 64 states: ‘Different sustainability matters can be material in relation to different
parts of the undertaking’s upstream and downstream value chain.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 75 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose any metrics that it uses to evaluate
performance and effectiveness in relation to a material impact, risk or opportunity.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 76 states: ‘Metrics shall include those defined in ESRS, as well as metrics
identified on an entity-specific basis, whether taken from other sources or developed by the
undertaking itself.’
IG 2 Value chain, ‘Summary in 7 key points’, point 5 states: ‘Topical standards require to include
VC data only for a few metrics. However, when the undertaking considers that a material IRO in
the VC is not sufficiently covered by the requirements in ESRS, it shall include additional entity-
specific disclosures, including metrics when such information is necessary in order to enable users
to understand the undertaking’s material impacts, risks or opportunities.’
Answer
Yes, the undertaking can report different metrics for the same sustainability matter for different
parts of its value chain based on which metrics are deemed material for its own operations and
its value chain. In relation to the example provided by the submitter, this means that the
undertaking would disclose its water consumption in relation to its upstream value chain if
material (this would be an entity-specific disclosure when applying sector-agnostic standards), but
it would not disclose its water consumption in its own operations if not material. At the same
time, it could disclose water withdrawal for its own operations if material (this is an optional
metric) but not disclose this metric in relation to its upstream or downstream value chain if
impacts in the value chain are not material. If only impacts upstream are material, the metric in
relation to own operation and downstream value chain are not disclosed.
More specifically, concerning this example the following is to be noted. ESRS E3-4 paragraph 28(a)
requires reporting water consumption in the undertaking’s own operations only. If the
undertaking deems that this metric is not material for its own operations, it shall not disclose it
(see ESRS 1 paragraph 34 (b)). At the same time, if the metric water consumption is identified as
material in the upstream or downstream value chain, the undertaking would be required to
disclose it as an entity-specific metric (see ESRS 1 paragraph 11).
ESRS E3-4 paragraph AR 32 provides the option to disclose the metric on the undertaking’s water
withdrawal. Therefore, if the undertaking considers this metric material for its own operation, it
may choose to disclose it. At the same time, if this metric is deemed not material for its upstream
or downstream value chain, it would not disclose it in connection to the value chain.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 190 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question ID 776 – Pollutants emissions – granularity
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
(1) Could you clarify the level of detail required in reporting pollutants (including
microplastics)?
(2) When is it possible to resort to estimations?
(3) Do all the pollutants listed in the E-PRTR and all microplastics need to be measured?
ESRS Reference
E2-4 paragraph 28
Key terms
Pollution; microplastics; granularity
Background
To better address the issue addressed by the submitter, it was agreed to change the question
received, ‘The level of detail required in measuring pollutants is very unclear; could you please
clarify?’ to the question above.
ESRS 1 paragraph 11 states: ‘In addition to the disclosure requirements laid down in the three
categories of ESRS, when an undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not
covered or not covered with sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific
facts and circumstances, it shall provide additional entity-specific disclosures to enable users to
understand the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities. Application
requirements AR 1 to AR 5 provide further guidance regarding entity-specific disclosures.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 54 states: ‘When needed for a proper understanding of its material impacts, risks
and opportunities, the undertaking shall disaggregate the reported information … (b) by significant
site or by significant asset, when material impacts, risks and opportunities are highly dependent
on a specific location or asset.’ ESRS 1 paragraph 69 states: ‘There are circumstances where the
undertaking cannot collect the information about its upstream and downstream value chain as
required by paragraph 63 after making reasonable efforts to do so. In these circumstances, the
undertaking shall estimate the information to be reported about its upstream and downstream
value chain by using all reasonable and supportable information, such as sector-average data and
other proxies’.
ESRS 1 paragraph 72 states: ‘The incorporation of estimates made using sector-average data or
other proxies shall not result in information that does not meet the qualitative characteristics of
information (see Chapter 2 and Section 7.2 Sources of estimation and outcome uncertainty of this
Standard)’.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 191 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS E2 paragraph 28) states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the amounts of: (a) each pollutant
listed in Annex II of Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council
(European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register ‘E-PRTR Regulation’) emitted to air, water and
soil, with the exception of emissions of GHGs which are disclosed in accordance with ESRS E1
Climate Change; (b) microplastics generated or used by the undertaking.’
ESRS E2 paragraph 29 states: ‘The consolidation shall include only the emissions from facilities for
which the applicable threshold value specified in Annex II of Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 is
exceeded.’
ESRS E2-4 paragraph 31 states: ‘When an inferior methodology compared to direct measurement
of emissions is chosen to quantify emissions, the reasons for choosing this inferior methodology
shall be outlined by the undertaking. If the undertaking uses estimates, it shall disclose the
standard, sectoral study or sources which form the basis of its estimates, as well as the possible
degree of uncertainty and the range of estimates reflecting the measurement uncertainty.’
ESRS E2 paragraph AR 26 states: ‘When providing information on pollutants , the undertaking shall
consider approaches for quantification in the following order of priority: (a) direct measurement
of emissions, effluents or other pollution through the use of recognised continuous monitoring
systems (e.g., AMS Automated Measuring Systems); (b) periodic measurements; (c) calculation
based on site -specific data; (d) calculation based on published pollution factors; and (e)
estimation.’
ESRS E2 paragraph 11 states: ‘The undertaking shall describe the process to identify material
impacts, risks and opportunities and shall provide information on: (a) whether the undertaking
has screened its site locations and business activities in order to identify its actual and potential
pollution-related impacts, risks and opportunities in its own operations and upstream and
downstream value chain, and if so, the methodologies, assumptions and tools used in the
screening; (b) whether and how the undertaking has conducted consultations, in particular with
affected communities.’
Regulation (EU) 2024/1244 (IEPR), Annex I, provides a list of activities that fall within its scope.
Recital (12) states: ‘To comply with the requirements of the Protocol, the reporting requirements
provided for in this Regulation should apply to all activities listed in Annex I to the Protocol and, in
fulfilling those reporting requirements, the facility to which the installation, or part thereof,
belongs should be indicated. In addition, and with a view to achieving synergies with related Union
environmental law affecting industrial installations, the scope of this Regulation should also be
aligned with the industrial activities under Annexes I and Ia to Directive 2010/75/EU and with
certain activities covered by Directive (EU) 2015/2193 of the European Parliament and of the
Council’.
Answer
(1) Could you clarify the level of detail required in reporting pollutants (including
microplastics)?
The level of detail required in reporting pollutants is not specific. The selection of pollutants that
the undertakings will need to disclose will depend on the pollutants (including microplastics) that
are material for their specific operations (ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement IRO-1). Therefore, the
undertaking will need to conduct a materiality assessment, including being transparent on
whether any screening of its site locations and business activities were conducted, considering
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 192 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
the pollutants they emit, the quantities, and the associated impacts of those emissions, as well as
any consultations with the communities that are affected by its operations where appropriate. In
addition, the undertaking shall disaggregate the information by significant site or by significant
asset when material pollution-related impacts, risks and opportunities are highly dependent on a
specific location or asset. For further information on the disaggregation of reported pollutant
emissions, please consult ID 440.
(2) When is it possible to resort to estimations?
Estimations are generally considered a less preferable measuring methodology compared to
direct observations. However, should the undertaking be compelled to resort to reporting by
estimation (e.g. due to the unfeasibility of collecting information about its upstream and
downstream value chain), it should provide an explanation as well as a description of the
methodologies, assumptions and tools used. The incorporation of estimates made using sector-
average data or other proxies shall meet the qualitative characteristics of information as defined
in ESRS 1. In the specific case of microplastics, it is worth noting that estimations may be the only
feasible measuring methodology (particularly in the case of wear and tear of larger pieces of
plastics, such as car tires or synthetic textiles) and, therefore, undertakings will most likely resort
to estimations when reporting on microplastics.
(3) Do all the pollutants listed in the E-PRTR and all microplastics need to be measured?
In terms of E-PRTR pollutants, considering that the undertaking will need to refer to all material
pollutants, it will report only on each material pollutant listed in the E-PRTR under ESRS E2-4
paragraph 28(a), whereas other pollutants assessed as material but not included in the E-PRTR
are to be reported under entity-specific disclosures.
See also Question ID 441 - Microplastics for further information on microplastics and to Question
ID 440 - Pollutants emissions - disaggregation to better understand the disaggregation level
needed when reporting on pollutant emissions.
Supporting material
Regulation (EU) 2024/1244 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 April 2024 on
reporting of environmental data from industrial installations, establishing an Industrial Emissions
Portal and repealing Regulation (EC) No 166/2006.
ESRS E4 Biodiversity
ESRS E4 Biodiversity
ESRS E4 Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 Description of
processes to identify and assess material biodiversity and ecosystem-
related impacts, risks and opportunities
Question ID 1025 – Direct drivers of biodiversity loss – definition
Release date
November 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 193 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question asked
What is the meaning of ‘Direct impact drivers of biodiversity loss’?
Related question derived from the background provided by the submitter: ‘Does “direct” refer to
own operations, or does “direct” refer to impacts caused anywhere in the value chain causing a
direct impact on biodiversity?’
ESRS Reference
ESRS 1 paragraph AR 16; ESRS E4 paragraph AR 4
Key terms
Biodiversity loss; direct impact drivers of biodiversity loss
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph AR 16 states: ‘When performing its materiality assessment, the undertaking
shall consider the following list of sustainability matters covered in the topical ESRS …
Topical ESRS Sustainability matters covered in topical ESRS
Topic Sub-topic Sub-sub-topics
ESRS E4 Biodiversity and Direct impact drivers of - Climate Change
ecosystems biodiversity loss - Land-use change, fresh
water-use change
and sea-use change
- Direct exploitation
- Invasive alien species
- Pollution
- Others
Impacts on the state of Examples:
species - Species population size
- Species global
extinction risk
Impacts on the extent and Examples:
condition of - Land degradation
ecosystems - Desertification
- Soil sealing
Impacts and
dependencies on
ecosystem services
…’.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 194 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS E4 paragraph AR 4 states: ‘The materiality assessment under ESRS E4 includes the
undertaking’s:
(a) contribution to direct impact drivers on biodiversity loss:
i. climate change;
ii. land-use change (e.g. land artificialisation), freshwater-use change and sea-use
change;
iii. direct exploitation;
iv. invasive alien species ;
v. pollution; and
vi. others.
…’
‘Impact Drivers’ is defined in the ESRS Glossary as: ‘All the factors that cause changes in nature,
anthropogenic assets, nature’s contributions to people and a good quality of life. Direct drivers
of change can be both natural and anthropogenic; they have direct physical (mechanical,
chemical, noise, light, etc.) and behaviour-affecting impacts on nature. They include, inter alia,
climate change, pollution, different types of land use change, invasive alien species and zoonoses,
and exploitation. Indirect impact drivers operate diffusely by altering and influencing direct
drivers (by affecting their level, direction or rate) as well as other indirect drivers. Interactions
between indirect and direct drivers create different chains of relationship, attribution, and
impacts, which may vary according to type, intensity, duration, and distance. These relationships
can also lead to different types of spill-over effects. Global indirect drivers include economic,
demographic, governance, technological and cultural ones. Special attention is given, among
indirect drivers, to the role of institutions (both formal and informal) and impacts of the patterns
of production, supply and consumption on nature, nature’s contributions to people and good
quality of life.’
The ESRS E4 Biodiversity and Ecosystems Basis for Conclusions (March2023) states: ‘According to
the IPBES, pressures on biodiversity and ecosystems, also termed key biodiversity loss impact
drivers, originate from five categories of impact drivers: land-use or habitat change, climate
change, pollution, natural resource use and exploitation, as well as invasive species …’.
The term ‘Direct drivers (of biodiversity and ecosystem change)’ is a term first coined by the
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES). The
IPBES defines direct drivers: ‘Direct drivers (natural and anthropogenic) are drivers that
unequivocally influence biodiversity and ecosystem processes (also referred to as “pressures”).’
Find more information, also on the definition of ‘indirect drivers’, here:
https://www.ipbes.net/models-drivers-biodiversity-ecosystem-change.
Answer
The term ‘direct’ refers to the immediate or unambiguous pressure or impact that climate change,
land/fresh water/sea-use change, pollution, direct exploitation and invasive alien species have on
biodiversity and ecosystems’ loss or degradation. The term ‘direct’ in this context does not refer
to whether the impact originates from the undertaking’s own operations or from its upstream or
downstream value chain. Direct impact drivers of biodiversity loss can be connected to the
undertaking’s own operations, to its upstream or downstream value chain or to all of them. The
term ‘direct drivers’ was first introduced by the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES; see background).
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 195 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
For example, consider an undertaking that uses timber as a primary material in one of its
products. The extraction of timber (a direct exploitation of a natural resource, which is one of the
five impact drivers) causes a negative impact on the natural habitat from which it is sourced,
leading to ecosystem degradation and biodiversity loss. Whether the extraction is carried out by
the undertaking itself (own operations) or, for instance, by one of its suppliers (upstream value
chain), this exploitation of natural resources would be a ‘direct driver’ of ecosystem and
biodiversity loss in that specific location.
In the context of the ESRS, ‘Direct impact drivers of biodiversity loss’ and ‘Direct drivers of
biodiversity and ecosystems change’ can be used interchangeably (see also the ESRS Glossary’s
definition of ‘Impact drivers’ in the background above).
ESRS E4-5 – Impact metrics related to biodiversity and ecosystems change
Question ID 802 – Reference lists of biodiversity-sensitive areas
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
ESRS say ‘biodiversity sensitive areas’ are Natura 2000 network of protected areas, UNESCO
World Heritage sites and KBAs, plus other protected areas, as referred to in Appendix D of Annex
II to Commission Delegated Reg (EU) 2021/2139. Would any one of the datasets be sufficient for
this metric, or does it have to be all?
ESRS reference
ESRS E4-5 paragraph 35
Key terms
Biodiversity-sensitive areas
Background
ESRS E4-5 paragraph 35 states: ‘If the undertaking identified sites located in or near biodiversity-
sensitive areas that it is negatively affecting (see paragraph 19 (a)), the undertaking shall disclose
the number and area (in hectares) of sites owned, leased or managed in or near these protected
areas or key biodiversity areas.’
ANNEX II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms defines biodiversity-sensitive areas as: ‘Natura 2000
network of protected areas, UNESCO World Heritage sites and Key Biodiversity Areas (‘KBAs’), as
well as other protected areas, as referred to in Appendix D of Annex II to Commission Delegated
Regulation (EU) 2021/2139(8).’
Appendix D of Annex II to Commission Delegated Reg (EU) 2021/2139 states: ‘… For
sites/operations located in or near biodiversity-sensitive areas (including the Natura 2000
network of protected areas, UNESCO World Heritage sites and Key Biodiversity Areas, as well as
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 196 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
other protected areas), an appropriate assessment (3), where applicable, has been conducted
and based on its conclusions the necessary mitigation measures (4) are implemented.’
The World Database on Protected Areas (WDPA) is the most comprehensive global database of
marine and terrestrial protected areas. It is a joint project between the UN Environment
Programme and the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), and it is managed by
the UN Environment Programme World Conservation Monitoring Centre (UNEP-WCMC) in
collaboration with governments, non-governmental organisations, academia and industry.
Answer
To identify a biodiversity-sensitive area that meets the criteria of ESRS E4 Disclosure Requirement
E4-5, it is sufficient that the area is listed in only one of the sources mentioned under the
definition of biodiversity-sensitive area in the ESRS Glossary of Terms (see background).
If the relevant site is not included under the Natura 2000 network of protected areas, UNESCO
World Heritage sites and/or Key Biodiversity Areas (‘KBAs’), the undertaking needs to assess if it
falls under ‘other protected areas’ as per the ESRS glossary definition. Other protected areas
could be, for instance, forest protected areas or areas lying within river basin districts designated
as requiring special protection by governmental authorities. This may require consulting national
legislation sources defining these other protected areas. In addition, the World Database on
Protected Areas (WDPA) can support preparers in the identification of protected areas.
Question ID 953 – Mandatory disclosures of material metrics on
biodiversity
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Is it mandatory to report a metric for each material impact on biodiversity and ecosystems?
ESRS Reference
ESRS E4 paragraphs 33, 38-41
Key terms
Metrics; mandatory
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 11 states: ‘In addition to the disclosure requirements laid down in the three
categories of ESRS, when an undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not
covered or not covered with sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific
facts and circumstances, it shall provide additional entity-specific disclosures to enable users to
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 197 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
understand the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities . Application
requirements AR 1 to AR 5 provide further guidance regarding entity-specific disclosures.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 34 states: ‘When disclosing information on metrics for a material sustainability
matter according to the Metrics and Targets section of the relevant topical ESRS, the undertaking:
(a) shall include the information prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement if it assesses such
information to be material; and
(b) may omit the information prescribed by a datapoint of a Disclosure Requirement if it
assesses such information to be not material and concludes that such information is not
needed to meet the objective of the Disclosure Requirement.’
ESRS 1 paragraph AR 3 states ‘When determining the usefulness of metrics for inclusion in its
entity-specific disclosures, the undertaking shall consider whether:
(a) its chosen performance metrics provide insight into:
i. how effective its practices are in reducing negative outcomes and/or increasing
positive outcomes for people and the environment (for impacts); and/or
ii. the likelihood that its practices result in financial effects on the undertaking (for risks
and opportunities);
(b) the measured outcomes are sufficiently reliable, meaning that they do not involve an
excessive number of assumptions and unknowns that would render the metrics too
arbitrary to provide a faithful representation; and
(c) it has provided sufficient contextual information to interpret performance metrics
appropriately, and whether variations in such contextual information may impact the
comparability of the metrics over time.’
ESRS E4 paragraph 33 states: ‘The undertaking shall report metrics related to its material impacts
on biodiversity and ecosystems.’
ESRS E4 paragraph 35 states: ‘If the undertaking identified sites located in or near biodiversity-
sensitive areas that it is negatively affecting (see paragraph 19(a)), the undertaking shall disclose
the number and area (in hectares) of sites owned, leased or managed in or near these protected
areas or key biodiversity areas.
ESRS E4 paragraph 38 states: ‘If the undertaking has concluded that it directly contributes to the
impact drivers of land-use change, freshwater-use change and/or sea-use change, it shall report
relevant metrics. The undertaking may disclose metrics that measure:
(a) the conversion over time (e.g. 1 or 5 years) of land cover (e.g. deforestation or mining);
(b) changes over time (e.g. 1 or 5 years) in the management of the ecosystem (e.g.
through the intensification of agricultural management, or the application of better
management practices or forestry harvesting);
(c) changes in the spatial configuration of the landscape (e.g. fragmentation of habitats,
changes in ecosystem connectivity);
(d) changes in ecosystem structural connectivity (e.g. habitat permeability based on
physical features and arrangements of habitat patches); and
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 198 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(e) the functional connectivity (e.g. how well genes or individuals move through land,
freshwater and seascape).’
ESRS E4 paragraph 39 states: ‘If the undertaking concluded that it directly contributes to the
accidental or voluntary introduction of invasive alien species, the undertaking may disclose the
metrics it uses to manage pathways of introduction and spread of invasive alien species and the
risks posed by invasive alien species.’
ESRS E4 paragraph 40 states: ‘If the undertaking identified material imp
cts related to the state of species, the undertaking may report metrics it considers relevant. The
undertaking may:
(a) refer to relevant disclosure requirements in ESRS E1, ESRS E2, ESRS E3, and ESRS E5;
(b) consider population size, range within specific ecosystems as well as extinction risk.
These aspects provide insight on the health of a single species’ population and its
relative resilience to human induced and naturally occurring change;
(c) disclose metrics that measure changes in the number of individuals of a species within
a specific area;
(d) disclose metrics on species at extinction risk (80) that measure:
i. the threat status of species and how activities/pressures may affect the threat
status; or
ii. changes in the relevant habitat for a threatened species as a proxy for the
undertaking’s impact on the local population’s extinction risk.’
ESRS E4 paragraph 41 states: ‘If the undertaking identified material impacts related to ecosystems,
it may disclose:
(a) with regard to ecosystems extent, metrics that measure area coverage of a particular
ecosystem without necessarily considering the quality of the area being assessed, such
as habitat cover. For example, forest cover is a measure of the extent of a particular
ecosystem type, without factoring in the condition of the ecosystem (e.g. provides the
area without describing the species diversity w
(b) thin the forest);
(c) with regard to the ecosystem’s condition:
i. metrics that measure the quality of ecosystems relative to a pre-determined
reference state;
ii. metrics that measure multiple species within an ecosystem rather than the
number of individuals within a single species within an ecosystem (for example:
scientifically established species richness and abundance indicators that measure
the development of (native) species composition within an ecosystem against the
reference state at the beginning of the first reporting period as well as the
targeted state outlined in the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework,
or an aggregation of species’ conservation status if relevant); or
iii. metrics that reflect structural components of condition such as habitat
connectivity (i.e. how linked habitats are to each other).’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 199 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Answer
No, ESRS E4 does not require reporting metrics for each material impact. For ESRS E4, it is only
mandatory for the undertaking to report metrics for ESRS E4 paragraph 35 (if the undertaking
identified sites located in or near biodiversity-sensitive areas that it is negatively affecting) and
for paragraph 38. In applying paragraphs 35 and 38, the conditions of ESRS 1 paragraph 34 apply
(see background). The disclosure of metrics related to ESRS E4 paragraphs 39, 40 and 41 is
voluntary even if the undertaking has identified material impacts in connection with the subtopics
mentioned in those paragraphs (the undertaking would still be required to disclose on the other
provisions listed in ESRS E4 for those material subtopics).
With regard to ESRS E4 paragraph 38, the undertaking can choose to disclose metrics that
measure other or only a few of the aspects listed in that paragraph. The undertaking shall refer
to ESRS 1 paragraph 11 when identifying relevant entity-specific metrics.
Impact metrics in ESRS E4 are rarely standardized. For disclosure requirements where they are
not, it is the responsibility of the undertaking to identify the metrics that are relevant to be
disclosed (see ESRS 1 paragraph 31 and Appendix B of ESRS 1 for the definition of ‘relevance’). To
assist the undertakings in this process, ESRS E4-5 indicates metrics or indicators that measure
relevant aspects related to ecosystems and biodiversity and that may be material for
undertakings to disclose.
In relation to paragraphs 39, 40 and 41, reporting on metrics is optional. However, if the
undertaking concludes that the inclusion of entity specific metric(s) is necessary (ESRS 1
paragraph 11), the provisions in these paragraphs support the identification of relevant metrics
to be reported.
See also Question ID 526 and ID 1021 – Disclosure of a non-material datapoint (water-
consumption in own operations) related to a (a) material and (b) non-material topic.
Question ID 1115 – Disclosing the number and area of sites near or in
biodiversity-sensitive areas
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Is it mandatory to report this metric (ESRS E4 paragraph 35) if analyses show that there are no
negative impacts on any areas at sites located in or near the biodiversity-sensitive areas? Follow-
up question: is it required to report the metric if there is (also) no materiality for the sustainability
topic of biodiversity for the own operations?
ESRS Reference
ESRS E4-5 paragraph 35
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 200 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Key terms
Impacts on biodiversity; biodiversity-sensitive areas
Background
ESRS E4-5 paragraph 19 states: ‘The undertaking shall specifically disclose:
(a) whether or not it has sites located in or near biodiversity-sensitive areas and whether
activities related to these sites negatively affect these areas by leading to the
deterioration of natural habitats and the habitats of species and to the disturbance of
the species for which a protected area has been designated; …’.
ESRS E4-5 paragraph 35 states: ‘If the undertaking identified sites located in or near biodiversity-
sensitive areas that it is negatively affecting (see paragraph 19(a)), the undertaking shall disclose
the number and area (in hectares) of sites owned, leased or managed in or near these protected
areas or key biodiversity areas.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 29 states: ‘Irrespective of the outcome of its materiality assessment, the
undertaking shall always disclose the information required by: ESRS 2 General Disclosures (i.e. all
the Disclosure Requirements and datapoints specified in ESRS 2) and the Disclosure Requirements
(including their datapoints) in topical ESRS related to the Disclosure Requirement IRO-1
Description of the process to identify and assess material impacts, risks and opportunities, as listed
in ESRS 2 Appendix C Disclosure/Application Requirements in topical ESRS that are applicable
jointly with ESRS 2 General Disclosures.’
Answer
No, if the undertaking concludes that it is not negatively affecting biodiversity-sensitive areas in
or near sites that it owns, leases or manages, it shall not disclose the number and area of those
sites (in relation to ESRS E4 paragraph 35).
The undertaking, however, must always disclose whether it has sites located in or near
biodiversity-sensitive areas and whether activities related to these sites negatively affect these
areas under ESRS E4 paragraph 19 (a). This disclosure is related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 and, therefore,
this information needs to be disclosed irrespective of the outcome of the undertaking’s
materiality assessment considering relevance of information (see ESRS 1 paragraphs 29 and 31).
Question ID 1172 – Disclosure of the area of sites in or near
biodiversity-sensitive area
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Concerning the sites located in or near biodiversity-sensitive areas that the undertaking is
negatively affecting, the undertaking has to disclose the number of sites and their area. Does the
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 201 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
undertaking have to disclose the total area of the site or just the area inside or near the
biodiversity-sensitive area?
ESRS Reference
ESRS E4 paragraph 35
Key terms
Biodiversity-sensitive areas; area of site
Background
ESRS E4 paragraph 35 states: ‘If the undertaking identified sites located in or near biodiversity-
sensitive areas that it is negatively affecting (see paragraph 19(a)), the undertaking shall disclose
the number and area (in hectares) of sites owned, leased or managed in or near these protected
areas or key biodiversity areas.’
ESRS E4 paragraph 19(a) states: ‘The undertaking shall specifically disclose: (a) whether or not it
has sites located in or near biodiversity-sensitive areas and whether activities related to these
sites negatively affect these areas by leading to the deterioration of natural habitats and the
habitats of species and to the disturbance of the species for which a protected area has been
designated …’.
Answer
The undertaking is required to disclose the total area (in hectares) of a site owned, leased or
managed in or near protected areas or key biodiversity areas if it has activities related to these
sites that are negatively affecting a biodiversity-sensitive area. The disclosure refers to the total
area of the site, not just the portion that may fall within or be adjacent to the biodiversity-
sensitive area.
Information on the total size of a site can be relevant to assess the undertaking’s actual and
potential impacts, as activities carried out in the site beyond the immediately adjacent or
overlapping portions of a site can still affect biodiversity-sensitive areas nearby.
What to consider as ‘near’ depends on the type of impact that the company has on the
biodiversity-sensitive area. It could, for example, depend on the type and amount of pollutant
emitted by the undertaking and whether it is transported by water flows (e.g. rivers), ground
water or air currents, potentially impacting aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems kilometres away
from the pollution source.
If the impact is directly related to land-use or land-use change, an understanding of the portion
of the site overlapping or adjacent to the biodiversity-sensitive area will better inform the
assessment of the impact of the undertaking on the biodiversity-sensitive site.
However, if the impacts are related to the integrity/fragmentation of habitats or the structural
connectivity of ecosystems that affect the movement of species between different areas, then
land-use or land-use change may be relevant to characterise even if not adjacent or overlapping
with the biodiversity-sensitive area. For example, the enlargement of a production site or land-
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 202 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
use change for agriculture between two biodiversity-sensitive areas may affect the connectivity
between the populations of a species and have a significant effect on their overall viability on both
biodiversity-sensitive areas. In this case, the undertaking’s site is not overlapping with or adjacent
to any biodiversity-sensitive area, but the undertaking will define as ‘near’ the two biodiversity-
sensitive sites based on its assessment of its actual or potential material impacts.
Characteristics like magnitude (e.g. amount of contaminant, noise intensity), spatial extent (e.g.
area of land contaminated, area of land converted to agriculture, size of habitat fragmentation)
and temporal extent (e.g. duration of persistence of contaminant, duration of habitat
modification) determine how impacts affect ecosystems and biodiversity and at what distance
and therefore help identify whether the undertaking’s site is located ‘near’ a biodiversity-sensitive
area.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 203 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS E5 Resource use and circular economy
ESRS E5 Resource use and circular economy
ESRS E5-5 Resource outflows
Question ID 283 – Whether waste incineration is a disposal operation
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Is incineration with energy recovery considered waste diverted or waste disposed?
ESRS reference
ESRS E5 paragraph 37
Key terms
Waste; waste incineration; waste recovery; waste disposal
Background
ESRS E5 paragraph 37 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the following information on its total
amount of waste from its own operations, in tonnes or kilogrammes:
(a) the total amount of waste generated;
(b) the total amount by weight diverted from disposal, with a breakdown between
hazardous waste and non-hazardous waste and a breakdown by the following
recovery operation types:
i. preparation for reuse;
ii. recycling; and
iii. other energy recovery;
(c) the amount by weight directed to disposal by waste treatment type and the total
amount summing all three types, with a breakdown between hazardous waste and
non-hazardous waste. The waste treatment types to be disclosed are:
i. incineration;
ii. landfill; and
iii. other disposal operations;
(d) the total amount and percentage of non-recycled waste.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 204 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Waste is defined in Annex II Glossary of Acronyms and Terms as ‘Any substance or object which
the holder discards or intends or is required to discard.’ This definition refers to Article 3(1) of
Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on
waste and repealing certain Directives (Waste Framework Directive or WFD).
Incineration is defined in Annex II Glossary of Acronyms and Terms as ‘The controlled burning of
waste at high temperature with or without energy recovery.’
Recovery is defined in Annex II Glossary of Acronyms and Terms as ‘Any operation the principal
result of which is waste serving a useful purpose by replacing other materials which would
otherwise have been used to fulfil a particular function, or waste being prepared to fulfil that
function, in the plant or in the wider economy.’ This definition refers to article 3(15) of the WFD.
Likewise, Article 3(15a) of the WFD on the definition of material recovery states that ‘“material
recovery” means any recovery operation, other than energy recovery and the reprocessing into
materials that are to be used as fuels or other means to generate energy’.
In addition, ESRS E5 Disclosure Requirement 5-1 requires an undertaking to consider whether and
how its policies address the waste hierarchy (as per Article 4(1) of the WFD: (a) prevention; (b)
preparing for re-use; (c) recycling; (d) other recovery, e.g. energy recovery; and (e) disposal.
The WFD also provides a list of Disposal and Recovery Operations in its Annex I and Annex II,
respectively. While incineration is included in Annex I of disposal operations (‘D10 Incineration on
land’), Annex II on recovery includes operation ‘R1 Use principally as fuel or other means to
generate energy’. This category potentially includes co-incineration where wastes are burned for
their fuel content, and a note is also included allowing the inclusion of Municipal Solid Waste
(MSW) incineration provided that a certain level of energy efficiency is achieved.
Answer
Incineration is to be treated as a recovery operation if it meets the conditions to be considered as
an ‘R1 Use principally as fuel or other means to generate energy’ operation, according to Annex
II of the Waste Framework Directive. In this case, it is considered as an ‘other energy recovery’
under ESRS E5 paragraph 37(b)(iii).
If the conditions in which incineration occurs are conducive to its classification as a ‘D10
incineration on land’ operation (Annex II of the Waste Framework Directive), then it shall be
classified as a disposal operation.
Supporting material
See also Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November
2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives (Waste Framework Directive or WFD).
Question ID 400 – Recycled waste
Release date
November 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 205 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question asked
Can we assume that recycled waste can be calculated by subtracting non-recycled waste from
total waste?
ESRS Reference
ESRS E5 paragraph 37
Key terms
Recycled waste
Background
ESRS E5-5 paragraph 37 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the following information on its
total amount of waste from its own operations, in tonnes or kilogrammes:
(a) the total amount of waste generated;
(b) the total amount by weight diverted from disposal, with a breakdown between
hazardous waste and non-hazardous waste and a breakdown by the following recovery
operation types:
(i) preparation for reuse;
(ii) recycling; and
(iii) other recovery operations …
(d) the total amount and percentage of non-recycled waste.’
Directive 2008/98/EC (Waste Framework Directive (WFD)), Article 4, includes recycling as part of
a waste hierarchy for waste management: ‘The following waste hierarchy shall apply as a priority
order in waste prevention and management legislation and policy: (a) prevention; (b) preparing
for re-use; (c) recycling; (d) other recovery, e.g. energy recovery; and (e) disposal’.
Answer
Yes, undertakings can assume that recycled waste can be calculated by subtracting non-recycled
waste from total waste provided that they consider all proper components in the equation of the
total waste (in order to understand what can be considered as ‘non-recycled waste’) and provided
that they know all components except the one of recycled waste.
As per the Waste Framework Directive (WFD), these are the components that need to be
considered in the equation of the total waste generated:
Total waste = recycled waste + reused waste + other recovery + disposed waste.
The above categories are to be understood as per definitions in the WFD:
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 206 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(a) Recycled waste: any recovery operation by which waste materials are reprocessed into
products, materials or substances. This includes the reprocessing of organic material but
excludes energy recovery and reprocessing into materials used as fuels.
(b) Reused waste: involves checking, cleaning or repairing recovery operations by which
products or components of products that have become waste are prepared to be re-used
without other pre-processing.
(c) Other recovery: any waste-recovery operation that serves a useful purpose by replacing
other materials. Notably, it includes energy recovery (e.g. incineration with energy
recovery).
(d) Disposed waste: waste that is not recovered (recycled or otherwise diverted from
disposal) and is sent to landfill or other disposal methods.
Nevertheless, given the equation, a missing component can be derived if the other components
in the equation are known. To calculate recycled waste, if this component is not known and all
others are, undertakings would have to use the following equation:
Recycled waste = total waste – (reused waste + other recovery + disposed waste)
Supporting material
Please see also Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19
November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives (Waste Directive).
Question ID 408 – Categorisation of waste streams
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Could you clarify the categorisation of the following waste streams (whether under ESRS E5
paragraph 37 (b) (iii), (c) (ii) or (c) (iii))? Composting of organic waste, fermentation of organic
waste and incineration of waste that results in energy production (which then is used/sold).
ESRS Reference
ESRS E5-5
Key terms
Waste stream, categorisation of
Background
ESRS E5-5 states that an undertaking shall disclose information on its resource outflows, including
waste, related to its material impacts, risks and opportunities.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 207 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS E5 paragraph 37 (b) and (c) require a breakdown by certain waste management operations,
namely:
(a) waste not directed to disposal operations by recovery operation type (E5 paragraph
37(b)(i)-(iii), which connects to the list of recovery operations in Annex II of the Waste
Directive; and
(b) waste directed to disposal operations by waste treatment types (E5 paragraphs 37(c)(i)-
(iii), which connect to the list of disposal operations in Annex I of the Waste Directive.
The ESRS Glossary’s definition of ‘incineration’ reads as follows: ‘Incineration is the controlled
burning of waste at high temperature with or without energy recovery.’
Answer
Composting and fermentation of organic wastes are considered a form of recycling – see Directive
2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (Waste Framework Directive, WFD),
Annex II, ‘R3 Recycling/reclamation of organic substances which are not used as solvents
(including composting and other biological transformation processes)’ – and a recovery operation
for the purposes of ESRS 5 paragraph 37 (b) (ii).
According to Annex l of the WFD, incineration without energy recovery is considered a disposal
operation (included as ‘D10 Incineration on land’) and is classified under ESRS E5 paragraph
37 (c) (i) Annex ll of the WFD, which sets out the different types of recovery operations.
Incineration with energy recovery is considered disposal if the criteria is not met (as explained in
the footnote to R1 of Annex ll, of the WFD) and is to be classified under the ‘R1 Use principally as
a fuel or other means to generate energy’ operation. If classified as an ‘R1 Use principally as a fuel
or other means to generate energy’ operation, incineration with energy recovery can be
considered under ESRS E5 paragraph 38(b)(iii) as ‘other recovery operations’.
See Question ID 283 – Whether waste incineration is a disposal operation.
Supporting material
Please see also Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19
November 2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives (Waste Directive).
Question ID 438 – Treatment of non-material datapoints, e.g.
radioactive waste – can it be a non-material datapoint?
Question ID 438 – Treatment of non-material datapoints, e.g. radioactive waste – can it be a non-
material datapoint?
Questions related to Social
ESRS S1 Own workforce
ESRS S1 Own workforce
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 208 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question ID 434 – Difference between non-employees and value
chain workers
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Regarding the differentiation between non-employees and employees of the value chain (ESRS
S1-7 and S2), could it be considered that the main difference is that non-employees carry out core
activities of the company and employees of the value chain only accessory or supply activities?
ESRS Reference
ESRS S1 paragraph 4, AR 3, and AR 62; ESRS S2 paragraph 4, and AR 3
Key terms
Value chain workers; non-employees
Background
Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms provides the following definition of non-employees:
‘Non-employees in an undertaking’s own workforce include both individual contractors supplying
labour to the undertaking (‘self-employed people’) and people provided by undertakings primarily
engaged in ‘employment activities (NACE Code N78).’
Value chain worker is defined as ‘An individual performing work in the value chain of the
undertaking, regardless of the existence or nature of any contractual relationship with the
undertaking. In the ESRS, the scope of workers in the value chain include all workers in the
undertaking’s upstream and downstream value chain who are or can be materially impacted by
the undertaking. This includes impacts that are connected to the undertaking’s own operations,
and value chain, including through its products or services, as well as through its business
relationships. This includes all workers who are not in the scope of “Own Workforce”. “Own
Workforce” includes people who are in an employment relationship with the undertaking
(“employees”) and non-employees who are either individual contractors supplying labour to the
undertaking (“self-employed people”) or people provided by undertakings primarily engaged in
employment activities (NACE Code N78).’
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 62 provides the following examples: ‘Examples of contractors (self-
employed people) in the undertaking’s own workforce include: contractors hired by the
undertaking to perform work that would otherwise be carried out by an employee; contractors
hired by the undertaking to perform work in a public area (for example, on a road, on the street);
and contractors hired by the undertaking to deliver the work/service directly at the workplace of
a client of the organization. Examples of people employed by a third party engaged in
“employment activities” whose work is under the direction of the undertaking include: people
who perform the same work that employees carry out, such as people who fill in for employees
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 209 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
who are temporarily absent (due to illness, holiday, parental leave, etc.); people performing
regular work at the same site as employees; and workers who are dispatched temporarily from
another EU Member State to work for the undertaking (“posted workers”). Examples of value
chain workers (and thus of workers not in the undertaking’s own workforce and reported under
the scope of ESRS S2) include: workers for a supplier contracted by the undertaking who work on
the supplier’s premises using the supplier’s work methods; workers for a “downstream” entity
which purchases goods or services from the undertaking; and workers of an equipment supplier
to the undertaking who, at one or more of the undertaking’s workplaces, perform regular
maintenance on the supplier’s equipment (for example, photocopier) as stipulated in the contract
between the equipment supplier and the undertaking.’
Answer
The ESRS definition is not based on the type of activities performed by employees (i.e. ‘core’ or
‘non-core’) and as such this terminology is not used in the ESRS. The definition is based on the
type of contract or labour relation. Non-employees include two types of workers, self-employed
workers and persons provided by undertakings primarily engaged in ‘employment activities’ for
whom the undertaking should have direct access to data on these types of workers (ESRS S1
paragraph 119; see also Question ID 33 Definitions of non-employees). Value chain workers
include all workers who are not in the scope of ‘Own Workforce’ and do not have a contractual
relationship with the undertaking. Examples of workers in the value chain may be found in ESRS
S2 paragraph AR 3, which include, for example, ‘workers of a supplier contracted by the
undertaking.’ ESRS S1 paragraph AR 62 also provides examples of both non-employees and value
chain workers.
ESRS S1-4 Taking action on material impacts and approaches to mitigating
material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to own
workforce, and effectiveness of those actions and approaches
Question ID 214 - Resources to manage material impacts
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
In paragraph 43 of ESRS S1 (‘the undertaking shall disclose what resources are allocated to the
management of its material impacts, with information that allows users to gain an understanding
of how the material impacts are managed’), it is unclear whether ‘material impacts’ is meant to
cover all material impacts or only ‘own workforce’ material impacts.
ESRS reference
ESRS S1-4 paragraph 43; ESRS S1 paragraph AR48; ESRS S1 paragraph 1.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 210 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Key Terms
Resources to manage material impacts
Background
The original question received has been reworded to the above to be clearer. The original question
was: ‘When mentioning ‘material impacts’ in paragraph 43 of ESRS S1-4, it is unclear if you mean
‘all’ material impacts or ‘own workforce’ material impacts.’
ESRS S1 paragraph 1 clarifies the objective of ESRS S1, specifying that Disclosure Requirements in
this topical standard will ‘enable users of the sustainability statement to understand the
undertaking’s material impacts on its own workforce.’
ESRS S1-4 paragraph 43 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose what resources are allocated to the
management of its material impacts, with information that allows users to gain an understanding
of how the material impacts are managed.’
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 48 further explains: ‘When disclosing the resources allocated to the
management of material impacts, the undertaking may explain which internal functions are
involved in managing the impacts and what types of action they take to address negative, and
advance positive, impacts.’
Answer
‘Resources allocated to the management of material impacts’ refers only to the disclosure of
resources allocated to the management of material matters pertaining to the ‘own workforce’
topic.
As paragraph 43 of ESRS S1-4 is part of the topical standard on ‘own workforce’, ‘material impacts’
in that paragraph is intended to refer specifically to material impacts on own workforce.
ESRS S1-6 Characteristics of the undertaking’s employees
Question ID 31 - Breakdown of temporary, permanent, and non-
guaranteed hours employees
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Is this a three-way split or are non-guaranteed hours employees part of temporary/permanent
employees?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1 paragraphs 50 (b), AR 55, and AR56
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 211 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Key Terms
Employees permanent; employees temporary; employees non-guaranteed hours
Background
ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (b) requires the disclosure of: ‘(b) the total number by head count or full-
time equivalent (FTE) of:
(i) permanent employees, and breakdown by gender;
(ii) temporary employees, and breakdown by gender; and
(iii) non-guaranteed hours employees, and breakdown by gender.’
Further information on how to present this information can be found in Table 3 and Table 4 in
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 55, while ESRS S1 paragraph AR 56 also provides a definition of non-
guaranteed hours employees as following: ‘Non-guaranteed hours employees are employed by
the undertaking without a guarantee of a minimum or fixed number of working hours. The
employee may need to make themselves available for work as required, but the undertaking is
not contractually obliged to offer the employee a minimum or fixed number of working hours per
day, week, or month. Casual employees, employees with zero-hour contracts, and on-call
employees are examples that fall under this category.’
Answer
ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (b) requires a three-way split of employees as the text distinguishes
between three datapoints, (i) permanent, (ii) temporary and (iii) non-guaranteed hours
employees, and it specifies that a breakdown by gender is required for the three datapoints. In
addition, ESRS S1 paragraph AR 55, Table 3 and Table 4 offer further guidance by providing the
template for presenting information on employees by contract type.
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 56 specifies that ‘the definitions of permanent, temporary, non-guaranteed
hours . . . employees differ between countries . . .’ and it also provides a definition of non-
guaranteed hours employees. While permanent and temporary employment relationships define
the duration of a contract, a non-guaranteed hours contract refers mainly to the expected working
time. The defining characteristic of non-guaranteed hours contracts is that they do not guarantee
a minimum or fixed number of working hours.
In some countries, non-guaranteed hours contracts may be further classified as either permanent
or temporary according to national legislation. Hence, in these countries the undertaking reports
those non-guaranteed hours employees under paragraph 50 (b)(iii) and also under paragraph 50
(b)(i) or (ii). The provision of contextual information in ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (e) requires
explaining how the information is reported; for example, the undertaking would describe if non-
guaranteed hours employees are also included within the permanent and temporary datapoints.
Question ID 32 – Methodology for presenting information on
employees
Release date
May 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 212 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question asked
(1) Are both FTE and head count figures to be reported?
(2) Can FTE be used as a proxy for head counts if 99% of the workforce is full-time?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1 paragraphs 50 (a), (b) and (d); 52 (a) and (b); 55 (b)(i); AR 55; and 34
Key terms
Methodology to compile data; FTE
Background
The question received: ‘Is there a materiality approach for the people reporting in place (for
example, if 99% of the workforce are full-time employees, the difference between our existing
FTE reporting and head count is negligible)? Does an additional head count reporting have to be
set up or can we keep FTE reporting and provide background information to users?’ has been
reworded to the above question to be clearer.
ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-6 on the characteristics of the undertaking’s employees
requires information on the number of employees and the number of breakdowns. The objective
of S1-6 is for the undertaking to provide insight into its approach to employment, to provide
contextual information that facilitates an understanding of the information reported in other
disclosures and to serve as the basis for calculating quantitative metrics to be disclosed under
other disclosure requirements in this Standard.
ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (a) requires the disclosure of ‘the total number of employees by head count,
and breakdowns by gender and by country for countries in which the undertaking has 50 or more
employees representing at least 10% of its total number of employees’. This requirement on the
number of employees is consistent with ESRS 2 SBM-1 paragraph 40 (a)(iii) whereby head count
data is also required.
ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-6 (paragraph 50 (b)) allows the undertaking to choose
between two methodologies to calculate the number of employees, which are either by head
count or full-time equivalent (FTE) of:
‘(i) permanent employees and breakdown by gender;
(ii) temporary employees and breakdown by gender; and
(iii) non-guaranteed hours employees and breakdown by gender.’
The voluntary disclosures in ESRS S1 paragraph 52 (a) (b) follow the same approach as detailed
above whereby there is the option of disclosing information on full-time and part-time employees
by either head count or FTE.
ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (d) requires ‘a description of the methodologies and assumptions used to
compile the data, including whether the numbers are reported:
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 213 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(i) in head count or full-time equivalent (FTE) (including an explanation of how FTE is
defined) …’.
Furthermore, ESRS S1 paragraph AR 55, Table 3 and Table 4 provide the relevant tables to present
this information in (Table 3: ‘Template for presenting information on employees by contract type,
broken down by gender (head count or FTE)’; and Table 4: ‘Template for presenting information
on employees by contract type, broken down by region (head count or FTE)’).
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 60 states: ‘Where data is not available for detailed information, the
undertaking shall use an estimation of the employee number or ratios, in accordance with ESRS
1, and clearly identify where the use of estimates has taken place.’
Answer
1. Are both FTE and head count figures to be reported?
The datapoint on the total number of employees (ESRS 1 paragraph 50 (a)) shall be reported in
terms of head count, since head count is the relevant metric for labour law and social policy (as
head count triggers many rights in social and labour law), and this is also consistent with the
requirements in ESRS 2 SBM-1 paragraph 40 (a)(iii).
Recognizing that it is common in some countries to report detailed employee information in full-
time equivalent (FTE) terms, S1-6 allows undertakings the option to report other datapoints
(permanent, temporary and non-guaranteed hours contract types as well as full- and part-time
contract types) in either head count or full-time equivalent (FTE) terms.
According to ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (b) and paragraph 52 (a)(b), the undertaking has two options
to report information on employees by contract type: head count or full-time equivalent. (ESRS
S1 paragraph AR 55, tables 3 and 4 contain the templates that undertakings shall use to disclose
this information.)
The option to report employee numbers with either head count or FTE metrics is explicitly allowed
only in S1-6 and in S1-7 when reporting on non-employees within own workforce. For the other
metrics in ESRS S1 (i.e., from ESRS S1-8 to ESRS S1-17), the disclosure requirements and their
related application requirements define the methodology to be followed for calculating
quantitative information on employees (for example, ESRS S1-14 AR80 on health and safety).
2. Can FTE be used as a proxy for head counts if 99% of the workforce is full-time?
For ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (a), there is no option with respect to the unit of account. The
undertaking is expected to comply with the text of ESRS by providing a figure according to the
unit of account as defined in the Disclosure Requirement. Still, an undertaking may refer to ESRS
S1 paragraph AR60 on the use of estimates and ratios.
Question ID 365 - Significant employment
Release date
May 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 214 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question asked
Please confirm that ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (a) should be read as disclosing on countries with at
least 10% of employees, not EITHER 50 OR 10%: ‘the total number of employees by head count,
and breakdowns by gender and by country for countries in which the undertaking has 50 or more
employees representing at least 10% of its total number of employees.’
ESRS reference
ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (a), and AR54
Key terms
Significant employment
Background
ESRS S1-6 paragraph 50 (a) requires the disclosure of the following information: ‘the total number
of employees by head count, and breakdowns by gender and by country for countries in which
the undertaking has 50 or more employees representing at least 10% of its total number of
employees.’ ESRS S1 paragraph AR54 explains that the ‘number of employees in each country is
also a key trigger for many information, consultation and participation rights for workers and
workers’ representatives, both in the Union labour acquis and in national law.’ This concept of
significant employment is furthermore clarified in Disclosure Requirement S1-8. ESRS S1
paragraph 60 (b) defines significant employment as ‘at least 50 employees by head count
representing at least 10% of its total number of employees.’
Answer
The breakdown by country must be disclosed for countries where at least 10% of the
undertaking’s employees are employed and the number of employees is at least 50, i.e. both
threshold conditions need to be met.
ESRS 1 paragraph 50 (a) requires different types of employee information:
(a) the total number of employees by head count; and
(b) breakdowns by gender and by country for countries in which the undertaking has 50 or
more employees representing at least 10% of its total number of employees.
As illustrated by Table 1 in ESRS S1 paragraph AR 55, the gender breakdown applies to all
employees, i.e., the minimum employment threshold at the country level for reporting does not
apply to this. As illustrated in Table 2 in ESRS S1 paragraph AR 55, the number of employees at the
country level is to be reported; however, this reporting is mandatory only for countries in which
both threshold conditions apply.
Question ID 430 – Definition of Gender
Release date
November 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 215 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question asked
Many datapoints in the S1 have to be broken down by gender. Which definition of ‘gender’ is used
in the ESRS? Is it only the female-male categories or should answers contain a third, ‘diverse’
category or more categories when breaking down information by gender?
ESRS Reference
ESRS S1 paragraph 50(a), ESRS S1 paragraph AR55
Key terms
Sex, breakdown; male; female
Background
ESRS S1 paragraph 50(a) requires a disclosure of ‘the total number of employees by head count,
and breakdowns by gender ….’ ESRS S1 paragraph AR 55 provides a template for presenting
information on employee head count by gender (Table 1) and explains: ‘In some Member States
it is possible for persons to legally register themselves as having a third, often neutral, gender,
which is categorised as “other” in the table above. However, if the undertaking is disclosing data
about employees where this is not possible, it may explain this and indicate that the “other”
category is not applicable.’
Answer
ESRS do not define gender, but they acknowledge the legal existence of three categories: female,
male and other. The disclosure templates in ESRS S1 AR 55 correspond to Disclosure Requirement
S1-6, therefore containing these three categories as well as a provision for reporting about
countries that do not legally recognise a third gender category. Unless otherwise stated, and
provided that the reporting undertaking reports these three categories already under Disclosure
Requirement S1-6, these categories must be used when Disclosure Requirements in ESRS S1
require, or give the option of, the disaggregation of a quantitative indicator by gender.
ESRS S1-7 Characteristics of non-employee workers in the undertakings’
own workforce
Question ID 33 - Definition of non-employees
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
Which groups can be considered as employees or non-employee workers in line with the German
HGB respectively other national laws?
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 216 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS S1 paragraphs 50 (a), 55 (a), 4, and AR 3
Key terms
Non-employees; employees
Background
ESRS S1 paragraph 4 describes the scope of ESRS S1 and states: ‘this Standard covers an
undertaking’s own workforce, which is understood to include both people who are in an
employment relationship with the undertaking (“employees”) and non-employees who are either
people with contracts with the undertaking to supply labour (“self-employed people”) or people
provided by undertakings primarily engaged in “employment activities” (NACE Code N78). See
Application Requirement 3 for examples of who falls under own workforce. The information
required to be disclosed with regard to non-employees shall not affect their status pursuant to
applicable labour law.’
In addition, ESRS S1 paragraph AR3 gives a number of examples of people who fall within the
category of non-employees and are included within ‘own workforce’; these are (a) contractors
(self-employed persons) and ‘(b) people employed by a third party engaged in “employment
activities” which include people who perform the same work that employees carry out.’
Answer
Since there is no definition of ‘employee’ provided under EU law, the status as an employee is
determined at the national level according to national laws and practice (employees are
individuals who are ‘in an employment relationship with the undertaking according to national
law and practice’).
The national labour law or practice of each country defines what type of contracts constitute an
employment relationship (i.e., an employee) and those that relate to non-employees.
ESRS S1-8 Collective bargaining coverage and social dialogue
Question ID 215 - Social dialogue global percentage
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Can you clarify the ‘global percentage reported at the country level’ in ESRS S1 paragraph 63?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1 paragraphs 63, AR 69 and AR 70
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 217 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Key Terms
Social dialogue; employees - global percentage; significant employment
Background
ESRS S1 paragraph 63 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the following information in relation
to social dialogue: (a) the global percentage of employees covered by workers’ representatives,
reported at the country level for each EEA country in which the undertaking has significant
employment . . .’
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 69 specifies that, ‘for calculating the information required by paragraph 63
(a), the undertaking shall identify in which EEA countries it has significant employment (i.e., at
least 50 employees representing at least 10% of its total employees). For these countries it shall
report the percentage of employees in that country which are employed in establishments in
which employees are represented by workers’ representatives.’
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 70 provides a template for reporting on collective bargaining coverage and
social dialogue, specifying that it applies to ‘EEA countries only.’
Answer
The term ‘global’ refers to the total or overall percentage of employees in a specific EEA country
working in establishments (e.g., factories, branches) with workplace representation, based on the
International Labour Organisation’s (ILO) definition of workers’ representatives. Workplace
representation enables social dialogue at the establishment level, which is different from social
dialogue at the group, sectoral, national or EU level. As an undertaking may have several
establishments in one country, the aim of this metric is to obtain the overall percentage of
employees with workplace representation for each EEA country where the undertaking has
significant employment (i.e., at least 50 employees representing at least 10% of its total
employees).
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 70 provides a template to present this information in. The column under
the heading ‘Social dialogue’ provides an example of how an undertaking with significant
employment in two EEA countries (country A and country B) can report this data point.
Question ID 376 - Definition of collective bargaining
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Please provide a definition of collective bargaining agreement.
ESRS reference
Disclosure Requirement S1-8
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 218 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Key terms
Collective bargaining agreement; working conditions
Background
Annex II of the Delegated Regulation defines collective bargaining as follows: ‘All negotiations
which take place between an employer, a group of employers or one or more employers’
organisations, on the one hand, and one or more trade unions or, in their absence, the
representatives of the workers duly elected and authorised by them in accordance with national
laws and regulations, on the other, for: i. determining working conditions and terms of
employment; and/or ii. regulating relations between employers and workers; and/or regulating
relations between employers or their organisations and a worker’s organisation or workers’
organisations.’
Answer
Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms provides a definition of collective bargaining (see above
in the background section) based on ILO Convention 154 on Collective Bargaining:
Collective bargaining agreements are understood as written agreements resulting from collective
bargaining, as defined above in the background section (in line with ILO Collective Agreements
Recommendation No. 91).
ESRS S1-10 Social protection
Question ID 730 – Type of employee and social protection
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
What does ‘type of employee’ mean for the purposes of Disclosure Requirement ESRS S1-11 Social
Protection?
ESRS Reference
ESRS S1 paragraph 75, ESRS S1 paragraph 50(b)
Key terms
Type of employee; social protection
Background
The question received was: ‘What do they mean by type of employee?’. It was reworded to the
above question for clarity.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 219 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS S1 paragraph 75 states: ‘If not all of its employees are covered by social protection in
accordance with paragraph 72, the undertaking shall in addition disclose the countries where
employees do not have social protection with regard to one or more of the types of events listed
in paragraph 72 and for each of those countries the types of employees who do not have social
protection with regard to each applicable major life event.’
ESRS S1 paragraph 50(b) states: ‘In addition to the information required by paragraph 40(a)(iii) of
ESRS 2 General Disclosures, the undertaking shall disclose: (b) the total number by head count or
full time equivalent (FTE) of: (i) permanent employees, and breakdown by gender; (ii) temporary
employees, and breakdown by gender; and (iii) non-guaranteed hours employees, and breakdown
by gender.’
Answer
‘Type of employee’ refers to the contract type (ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (b)). This includes permanent
employees, temporary employees and non-guaranteed hours employees.
ESRS S1-11 Social protection
Question ID 339 – Use of secondary data and social protection
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
May estimates or secondary data also be used for social topics if they concern social protection
on own workforce?
ESRS Reference
ESRS S1 paragraph 74, ESRS S1 paragraph 75
Key terms
Social protection; secondary data; estimates
Background
ESRS S1 paragraph 74 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose whether all its employees are covered
by social protection, through public programs or through benefits offered by the undertaking,
against loss of income due to any of the following major life events: (a) sickness, (b)
unemployment starting from when the own worker is working for the undertaking, (c)
employment injury and acquired disability, (d) parental leave; and (e) retirement. If so, stating this
is sufficient to fulfil this disclosure requirement and no further information is needed.’
ESRS S1 paragraph 75 states: ‘If not all of its employees are covered by social protection in
accordance with paragraph 72, the undertaking shall in addition disclose the countries where
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 220 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
employees do not have social protection with regard to one or more of the types of events listed
in paragraph 72 and for each of those countries the types of employees who do not have social
protection with regard to each applicable major life event.’
Answer
No, estimates or secondary data may not be used to determine whether an undertaking’s
employees are covered by social protection for this non-quantitative datapoint. Whether
employees are covered by social protection depends on public programs or benefits offered by
the undertaking (ESRS S1 paragraph 74). This information arises from the legal frameworks of the
various countries as well as contractual benefits provided by the undertaking to its employees.
Therefore, this information does not relate to quantitative metrics or value chain data, for which
the use of estimates may be appropriate (refer to ESRS 1 Chapter 5.2 and Chapter 7.2). However,
this does not rule out that some interpretation by the reporting undertaking may be needed when
compiling the information, for example, when laws about health insurance in a country in which
the undertaking operates are not perfectly clear about the kinds of illness that are covered.
Question ID 453 – Social protection and parental leave
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Is the requirement (d) concerning parental leave in ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-11 only
fulfilled if both female and male employees are granted this kind of leave?
ESRS Reference
ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-11; ESRS S1 paragraphs 74 (d) and AR 96 (c)
Key terms
Parental leave
Background
ESRS S1 paragraph 74 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose whether all its employees are
covered by social protection, through public programs or through benefits offered by the
undertaking, against loss of income due to any of the following major life events: (a) sickness, (b)
unemployment starting from when the own worker is working for the undertaking; (c)
employment injury and acquired disability, (d) parental leave; and (e) retirement. If so, stating
this is sufficient to fulfil this disclosure requirement and no further information is needed.’
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 96 states: ‘Family-related leave include maternity leave, paternity leave,
parental leave, and carers’ leave that is available under national law or collective agreements. For
the purpose of this Standard, these concepts are defined as: …
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 221 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(c) parental leave: leave from work for parents on the grounds of the birth or adoption of a
child to take care of that child, as defined by each Member State.’
Answer
Yes, the requirements of ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-11 are only fulfilled if both female
and male employees are covered by social protection provisions for parental leave programs
(either public or offered by the undertaking) on the grounds of birth or adoption of a child. By
definition, parental leave is granted to parents on the grounds of the birth or adoption of a child
to take care of that child (who is considered to be a parent depends on national law). For more
information on family-related leave, including parental leave, see ESRS S1 Disclosure
Requirement S1-15 and the related ID 340 Entitlement to family-related leave.
Supporting Material
Directive (EU) 2019/1158 on work-life balance for parents and carers ensures minimum rights for
paternity, parental and carers’ leave. Parental leave is defined in Article 3(b) as ‘leave from work
for parents on the grounds of the birth or adoption of a child to take care of that child.’ Member
States have the competence to define marital and family status and to establish who is considered
to be a parent, a mother and a father (Recital 18).
ESRS S1-12 Persons with disabilities
Question ID 473 – Restrictions due to national regulations
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
We think that disclosing ESRS S1 paragraph 88 (e) ‘the number of days lost to work-related injuries
and fatalities from work-related accidents, work-related ill health and fatalities from ill health’ of
non-employees would be non-compliant and against the law in Japan. Is it not against the law
under European law? How should we deal with such disclosure?
ESRS Reference
ESRS S1 paragraphs 79 and 88 (d) and (e)
Key terms
Data collection; data protection
Background
ESRS S1 paragraph 79 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the percentage of persons with
disabilities amongst its employees subject to legal restrictions on the collection of data.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 222 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS S1 paragraph 88 states: ‘The disclosure required by paragraph 86 shall include the following
information, where applicable broken down between employees and non-employees in the
undertaking’s own workforce: …
(d) with regard to the undertaking’s employees, the number of cases of recordable work-
related ill health, subject to legal restrictions on the collection of data; and
(e) with regard to the undertaking’s employees, the number of days lost to work-related
injuries and fatalities from work-related accidents, work-related ill health and fatalities
from ill health.’
Answer
The datapoints mentioned by the submitter relate to the SFDR principal adverse impacts.4
In some countries (especially outside the EEA), there may be restrictions on data collection of
employees. ESRS S1 acknowledges such restrictions for two specific datapoints but not as a
general principle; in particular, such provision is in ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-12, on
persons with disabilities as well as ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-14 (d)) on work-related ill
health and (e) on the days lost to work-related ill health and fatalities from ill health. For these
datapoints, where there is a conflict with national data protection law, it is not necessary to report
on the relevant datapoints Contextual information as described in ESRS 1 paragraph AR 76 can be
added for more transparency.
ESRS S1-14 Health and safety metrics
Question ID 271 and ID 287– Difference between work-related
accident and work-related injury
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
ID 271: What is the difference between work-related accident and work-related injury?
ID 287: What is the difference between an ‘accident’ and an ‘injury’, and how should I count a
‘case’?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1 paragraph 86; ESRS S1 paragraph 88(b)(c)(d)(e); ESRS S1 paragraph AR83, ESRS S1
paragraph AR89, ESRS S1 paragraph AR91
4 The applicable datapoint relates to SFDR Indicator number 3 in Table 3 of Annex I.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 223 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Key terms
Work-related injuries, rate of recordable work-related accidents
Background
ESRS S1 paragraph 86 states: ‘the undertaking shall disclose … the number of incidents associated
with work-related injuries, ill health and fatalities of its own workforce. In addition, it shall disclose
the number of fatalities as a result of work-related injuries and work-related ill health of other
workers working on the undertaking’s sites.’
ESRS S1 paragraph 88 states: ‘The disclosure required by paragraph 86 shall include the following
information, where applicable, broken down between employees and non-employees in the
undertaking’s own workforce: … (b) the number of fatalities as a result of work-related injuries
and work-related ill health; (c) the number and rate of recordable work-related accidents … (d) …
the number of cases of recordable work-related ill health … (e) … the number of days lost to work-
related injuries and fatalities from work-related accidents, work-related ill health and fatalities
from ill health.’
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 89 states: ‘In computing the rate of work-related injuries, the undertaking
shall divide the respective number of cases by the number of total hours worked by people in its
own workforce and multiplied by 1 000 000. Thereby, these rates represent the number of
respective cases per one million hours worked. A rate based on 1 000 000 hours worked indicates
the number of work-related injuries per 500 full time people in the workforce over a 1-year
timeframe. For comparability purposes a rate based on 1 000 000 hours worked shall be used also
for undertakings with less than 500 people in the workforce.‘
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 91 states: ‘An undertaking shall include fatalities as a result of work-related
injuries in the calculation of the number and rate of recordable work-related injuries.’
Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms defines ‘recordable work-related injury or ill health’ as
a ‘work-related injury or ill health that results in any of the following: death, days away from work,
restricted work or transfer to another job, medical treatment beyond first aid, or loss of
consciousness; or significant injury or ill health diagnosed by a physician or other licensed
healthcare professional, even if it does not result in death, days away from work, restricted work
or job transfer, medical treatment beyond first aid, or loss of consciousness.’
Answer
A work-related injury is one of the possible consequences of a work-related accident. This is
explained in the definition of ‘work-related incident’ provided in Annex II Acronyms and Glossary
of Terms: ‘Occurrence arising out of or in the course of work that could or does result in injury or
ill health … An incident that results in injury or ill health is often referred to as an “accident”. An
incident that has the potential to result in injury or ill health but where none occurs is often
referred to as a “close call”, “near-miss”, or “near-hit”.’
ESRS S1 paragraph 88 (c) requires a disclosure of the number and rate of recordable work-related
accidents, which includes accidents that result in work-related injuries and accidents that result
in work-related ill health. ESRS S1 paragraph AR 89 provides guidance on how to calculate the
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 224 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
rate of work-related injuries based on the number of cases of work-related injuries. ESRS S1
paragraph AR 91 specifies that fatalities as a result of work-related injuries should also be included
in the disclosure of ESRS S1 paragraph 88 (c).
To sum up, work-related incidents that result in work-related injury or ill health are work-related
accidents. Work-related accidents therefore include cases of both work-related injuries, including
work-related injuries that result in fatalities and cases of work-related ill health. To note, only the
cases of work-related ill health that occur as a result of accidents need to be considered. The
absolute number of recordable work-related accidents required by ESRS S1 paragraph 88(c) must
therefore include cases of both work-related injuries and work-related ill health.
Question ID 352 - Work-related ill health and fatalities from ill health
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
With regard to the undertaking’s employees, the number of days lost to work-related injuries and
fatalities from work-related accidents, work-related ill health and fatalities from ill health’: Why is
‘work-related’ not mentioned in the last part of the data point (fatalities from ill health) but is
attached to every other breakdown of this data point?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1 paragraphs 86 and 88 (e)
Key terms
Days lost; work-related; fatalities
Background
ESRS S1 paragraph 86 condenses the idea that: ‘The undertaking shall disclose information on …
the number of incidents associated with work-related injuries, ill health and fatalities of its own
workforce.’
ESRS S1 paragraph 88 states: ‘The disclosure required by paragraph 86 shall include the following
information, where applicable broken down between employees and non-employees in the
undertaking’s own workforce: …
(e) with regard to the undertaking’s employees, the number of days lost to work-related
injuries and fatalities from work-related accidents, work-related ill health and fatalities
from ill health.’
The definition for recordable work-related injury or ill health as provided in Annex II Acronyms
and Glossary of Terms also does not repeatedly refer to ‘work-related’ ill health: ‘work-related
injury or ill health that results in any of the following: i. death, days away from work, restricted
work or transfer to another job, medical treatment beyond first aid, or loss of consciousness; or
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 225 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ii. significant injury or ill health diagnosed by a physician or other licensed healthcare professional,
even if it does not result in death, days away from work, restricted work or job transfer, medical
treatment beyond first aid, or loss of consciousness.’
Answer
The objective of this Disclosure Requirement defines the information to be disclosed under ESRS
S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-14 and it describes fatalities to be disclosed that are the result of
work-related injuries and work-related ill health. Hence, ESRS S1 paragraph 88 (e) refers to work-
related ill health.
Question ID 473 – Restrictions due to national regulations
Question ID 473 – Restrictions due to national regulations
ESRS S1-15 Work-life balance
Question ID 340 – Entitlement to family-related leave
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Does the metric ‘family-related leave’ presume that an employee is entitled to every concept of
family-related leave?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1-15 paragraphs 93, AR96, and AR97
Key terms
Work-life balance; entitlement to take family-related leave
Background
Family-related leave is addressed in ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-15; specifically, ESRS S1
paragraph 93 requires a disclosure of ‘(a) the percentage of employees entitled to take family-
related leave ...’
The relevant definitions can be found in ESRS S1 paragraph AR 96, explaining that ‘family-related
leave includes maternity leave, paternity leave, parental leave and carer’s leave that is available
under national law or collective agreements. For the purposes of this Standard, these concepts
are defined as:
(a) maternity leave (also called pregnancy leave): employment-protected leave of absence for
employed women directly around the time of childbirth (or, in some countries, adoption);
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 226 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(b) paternity leave: leave from work for fathers or, where and insofar as recognised by national
law, for equivalent second parents, on the occasion of the birth or adoption of a child for the
purposes of providing care;
(c) parental leave: leave from work for parents on the grounds of the birth or adoption of a child
to take care of that child, as defined by each Member State;
(d) carer’s leave from work: leave for workers to provide personal care or support to a relative,
or a person who lives in the same household, in need of significant care or support for a
serious medical reason, as defined by each Member State.’
Furthermore, ESRS S1 paragraph AR 97 clarifies: ‘... employees entitled to family-related leave are
those who are covered by regulations, organisational policies, agreements, contracts or collective
bargaining agreements that contain family-related leave entitlements and have reported their
entitlement to the undertaking or the undertaking is aware of the entitlement.’
Answer
Yes, family-related leave is defined as including maternity leave, paternity leave, parental leave
and carer’s leave (ESRS S1 paragraph AR 96). The focus of the Disclosure Requirement is family-
related leave covered by regulations (for example, government’s social protection), organisational
policies, agreements, contracts or collective agreements (ESRS S1 paragraph AR97) that contain
family-related leave entitlements. Such entitlements may differ at a country level.
Being entitled to take family-related leave would thus mean, based on national law or collective
agreements, for female employees to be entitled to take maternity, parental and carer’s leave and
for male employees to be entitled to paternity, parental and carer’s leave. The scope of family
leave may vary across countries, and such contextual information may be relevant to users (for
example, that employees are entitled to maternity leave but not to paternity leave in a given
country). If based on national law or collective agreements female/male employees are not
entitled to all the respective female/male types of family-related leave, then they would not
qualify to be considered in the nominator of the metric.
Question ID 341 - Conditions for paternity, maternity, parental leave
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
What conditions must be met to consider an employee as being entitled to maternity or paternity
or parental leave in the meaning of ESRS S1?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1-15 paragraphs 92, 93, and AR 97
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 227 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Key terms
Work-life balance; family-related leave
Background
The objective of Disclosure Requirement S1-15 is two-fold. Firstly, it aims to: ‘provide an
understanding of the entitlement and actual practices amongst the employees to take family-
related leave.’ (ESRS S1 paragraph 92). ESRS S1 paragraph 93 (a) requires a disclosure of ‘(a) the
percentage of employees entitled to take family-related leave.’ ESRS S1 paragraph 94 adds: ‘If all
of the undertaking’s employees are entitled to family-related leave through social policy and/or
collective bargaining agreements, it is sufficient to disclose this in order to meet the requirements
of paragraph 93 (a).’
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 97 explains where the entitlement to family-related leave may derive from:
‘. . . employees entitled to family-related leave are those who are covered by regulations,
organisational policies, agreements, contracts or collective bargaining agreements that contain
family-related leave entitlements and have reported their entitlement to the undertaking or the
undertaking is aware of the entitlement.’
The relevant definitions, in line with EU legislation on work-life balance, can be found in ESRS S1
paragraph AR 96, explaining: ‘Family-related leave include maternity leave, paternity leave,
parental leave, and carers’ leave that is available under national law or collective agreements. For
the purposes of this Standard, these concepts are defined as:
(a) Maternity Leave (also called pregnancy leave): ‘employment-protected leave of absence
for employed women directly around the time of childbirth (or, in some countries,
adoption);
(b) Paternity Leave: leave from work for fathers or, where and in so far as recognised by
national law, for equivalent second parents, on the occasion of the birth or adoption of a
child for the purposes of providing care;
(c) Parental Leave: leave from work for parents on the grounds of the birth or adoption of a
child to take care of that child, as defined by each Member State;
(d) Carers’ Leave from work: leave for workers to provide personal care or support to a
relative, or a person who lives in the same household, in need of significant care or
support for a serious medical reason, as defined by each Member State.’
Answer
The entitlement to family-related leave does not depend on any triggering conditions (i.e., as
otherwise only pregnant employees would be entitled). Whether an employee is entitled to
family-related leave depends on family-related leave provisions under national law or collective
agreements (ESRS S1 paragraph AR96) where specific thresholds of minimum employment time
periods may exist to become entitled.
Employees entitled to family-related leave are those who are covered by regulations,
organisational policies, agreements, contracts or collective bargaining agreements that contain
family-related leave entitlements. The scope of family leave entitlement may vary across
countries, and such contextual information may be relevant to disclose to users.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 228 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS S1-16 Remuneration metrics (pay gap and total remuneration)
Question ID 132 - Gender pay gap
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Can you please specify if for the below indicators: the gender pay gap, defined as the difference
of average pay levels between female and male employees, expressed as percentage of the
average pay level of male employees; should we include variable components of salary or only
gross wage?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1-16 paragraphs 95, 97, and 98
Key Terms
Gender pay gap; gross wage; salary - variable components
Background
Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms states the following:
‘PAY: the ordinary basic or minimum wage or salary and any other remuneration, whether in cash
or in kind, which the worker receives directly or indirectly (“complementary or variable
components”) in respect of his/her employment from his/her employer. “Pay level” means gross
annual pay and the corresponding gross hourly pay. “Median pay level” means the pay of the
employee that would have half of the employees earn more and half less than they do’.
Disclosure Requirement S1-16 includes the following paragraphs on remuneration metrics (pay
gap and total remuneration):
‘95. The undertaking shall disclose the percentage gap in pay between its female and male
employees and the ratio between the remuneration of its highest paid individual and the median
remuneration for its employees.’
‘97. The disclosure required by paragraph 95 shall include: (a) the gender pay gap, defined as the
difference of average pay levels between female and male employees, expressed as a percentage
of the average pay level of male employees . . .’
‘98. The undertaking may disclose a breakdown of the gender pay gap as defined in paragraph
97 (a) by employee category and/or by country/segment. The undertaking may also disclose the
gender pay gap between employees by categories of employees broken down by ordinary basic
salary and complementary or variable components’.
ESRS S1 paragraph 97 includes additional information in a footnote as follows: ‘The gender pay
gap information supports the information needs of: financial market participants subject to
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 229 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is derived from a mandatory indicator related to principal
adverse impacts as set out by indicator #12 in Table I of Annex I of Commission Delegated
Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments
(“Unadjusted gender pay gap”); and benchmark administrators to disclose ESG factors subject to
Regulation (EU) 2020/1816 as set out by indicator “Weighted average gender pay gap” in Section
1 and 2 of Annex II.’
Answer
Complementary and variable components of the employee’s remuneration package form part of
the calculation. Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms defines ‘pay’ as the salary and other
remuneration in cash or in kind that the employee directly or indirectly receives in respect of
his/her employment.
ESRS S1-16 AR 98 describes the methodology to follow when calculating the gender pay gap
required by ESRS S1-16 paragraph 97 (a). The value to be used in the ratio is the gross hourly pay
level.
Question ID 387 - Scope of ESRS S1-16
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
ESRS S1-16 talks about employees but does not specify if it is only those that meet the inclusion
criteria (at least 50 employees and 10% of total employment).
ESRS reference
ESRS S1-6 paragraph 50 (a); Disclosure Requirement S1-16
Key terms
Employees; gender pay gap; significant employees
Background
ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-16 paragraph 95 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the
percentage gap in pay between its female and male employees and the ratio between the
remuneration of its highest paid individual and the median remuneration for its employees.’
The key characteristics of the undertaking’s employees are to be reported on in ESRS S1 Disclosure
Requirement S1-6, which serves as a basis for information required by other disclosure
requirements. ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (a) requires the disclosure of ‘the total number of employees
by head count’ as well as ‘breakdowns by gender and by country for countries in which the
undertaking has 50 or more employees representing at least 10% of its total number of
employees;’.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 230 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Answer
ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-16 and AR 98-102 specifically refer to including all employees
by head count in the calculation. Undertakings may report additional information based on
differentiating the pay gap by specific employee groups or country/segment, as specified in
paragraph 98; however, there is no employment threshold specified for the voluntary reporting
of this additional information.
Question ID 389 – Annual total remuneration ratio and types of
workers
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
(1) Should individuals on parental leave, long-term sick leave or long-term special leave who
receive less than their regular total annual remuneration be excluded from the annual
total remuneration calculation considering long-term leave as a consecutive period of at
least three months?
(2) When computing the annual total remuneration, do we consider the same salary
components for both the highest paid individual and the employees (e.g. benefits in cash
/ benefits in kind)?
ESRS Reference
ESRS S1 paragraphs 97 (b) and (c), and AR 101
Key terms
Annual total remuneration
Background
ESRS S1 paragraph 97 states: ‘The disclosure required by paragraph 95 shall include: …
(b) the annual total remuneration ratio of the highest paid individual to the median annual
total remuneration for all employees (excluding the highest-paid individual); and
(c) where applicable, any contextual information necessary to understand the data and how
the data has been compiled and other changes to the underlying data that are to be
considered.’
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 101 states: ‘When compiling the information required by paragraph 97(b),
the undertaking shall:
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 231 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(a) include all employees;
(b) consider, depending on the undertaking’s remuneration policies, all of the following:
i. base salary, which is the sum of guaranteed, short-term, and non-variable cash
compensation;
ii. benefits in cash, which is the sum of the base salary and cash allowances, bonuses,
commissions, cash profit-sharing, and other forms of variable cash payments;
iii. benefits in kind, such as cars, private health insurance, life insurance, wellness
programs; and
iv. direct remuneration, which is the sum of benefits in cash, benefits in kind and total
fair value of all annual long-term incentives (for example, stock option awards,
restricted stock shares or units, performance stock shares or units, phantom stock
shares, stock appreciation rights, and long-term cash awards).’
Answer
(1) Should individuals on parental leave, long-term sick leave or long-term special leave
who receive less than their regular total annual remuneration be excluded from the
annual total remuneration calculation considering long-term leave as a consecutive
period of at least three months?
The annual total remuneration ratio shall include all employees, as explicitly stated in ESRS S1
paragraph AR 101 (a). The undertaking may disclose its methodology used to compute the
remuneration ratio in ESRS S1 paragraph AR 102 and explain the number or percentage of
individuals on leave as contextual information.
(2) When computing the annual total remuneration, do we consider the same salary
components for both the highest paid individual and the employees (e.g. benefits in
cash / benefits in kind)?
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 101 (b) further explains which types of remuneration shall be included in
the calculation (depending on the undertaking’s remuneration policies). The same components
shall be considered for both the highest paid individual and the median total remuneration of
employees.
Question ID 549 – Gender pay gap; collective wage agreements
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
May non-exempt employees of an employer who are bound by a collective wage agreement be
omitted when calculating the gender pay gap (at least when broken down by employee category)?
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 232 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS Reference
ESRS S1 paragraphs 97 (a), (c), 98; and AR 98, AR 99
Key terms
Gender pay gap; collective wage agreements
Background
ESRS S1 paragraph 97 states: ‘The disclosure required by paragraph 95 shall include:
(a) the gender pay gap, defined as the difference of average pay levels between female and
male employees, expressed as percentage of the average pay level of male employees; …
(c) where applicable, any contextual information necessary to understand the data and how
the data has been compiled and other changes to the underlying data that are to be
considered.’
ESRS S1 paragraph 98 states: ‘The undertaking may disclose a breakdown of the gender pay gap
as defined in paragraph 97 (a) by employee category and/or by country/segment. The undertaking
may also disclose the gender pay gap between employees by categories of employees broken
down by ordinary basic salary and complementary or variable components.’
Answer
No, all male and female employees have to be included in the calculation of the gender pay gap
regardless of whether they are covered by collective agreements or not.
Collective agreements can set equal levels of wages and benefits for both male and female
employees (provided that all components of the definition of ‘pay’ are included in the calculation,
the gender pay gap broken down by employee categories would be negligible). The undertaking
may explain this when providing relevant contextual information under ESRS S1 paragraph 97 (c).
Question ID 689 – Gender Pay Gap and gender
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Does gender pay gap only have to be calculated for ‘female’ and ‘male’ genders? If so, where
should employees who have specified a different gender be categorised? Or is the calculation
based on the gender categories ‘female’, ‘male’, ‘diverse’/’other’?
ESRS Reference
ESRS S1 paragraphs 96, 97(c) and AR 98
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 233 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Key Terms
Gender Pay Gap; gender
Background
ESRS S1 paragraph 96 states: ‘The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is twofold: to allow an
understanding of the extent of any gap in the pay between women and men amongst the
undertaking’s employees; and to provide insight into the level of remuneration inequality inside
the undertaking and whether wide pay disparities exist.’
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 98(a) states: ‘When compiling the information required under paragraph
97(a) for the gap in pay between its female and male employees (also known as the “gender pay
gap”), the undertaking shall use the following methodology: (a) include all employees’ gross
hourly pay level …’
Answer
Yes, the gender pay gap calculation explicitly requires the inclusion of male and female employees
only. This is a SFDR PAI. There is no mention of ‘other employees’, as defined in ESRS S1 AR 55.
Any contextual information in this regard may be provided according to ESRS S1 paragraph 97 (c),
taking into account the general provision in ESRS 1 paragraph 11 in relation to entity-specific
information.
Question ID 690 – Gender Pay Gap and Pay Transparency Directive
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
The guideline stipulates that deviations of more than 5% per employee category must be justified.
How are these categories defined? If the reporting pay demonstrates a difference in the average
pay level of at least 5 % in any category of workers, the employer needs to justify such a difference
on the basis of objective, gender-neutral criteria – otherwise, joint pay assessment is necessary.
ESRS Reference
ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-16; ESRS 1 paragraph 114
Key Terms
Gender Pay Gap; Pay Transparency Directive
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 234 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
ESRS S1 paragraph 97 (a) states: ‘The disclosure required by paragraph 95 shall include: (a) the
gender pay gap, defined as the difference of average pay levels between female and male
employees, expressed as percentage of the average pay level of male employees.’
Answer
ESRS S1 paragraph 97 (a) requires disclosure of the gender pay gap and does not include any
requirements for conducting or reporting on pay assessments, and it does not include any
thresholds. The quote provided by the submitter stems from the Pay Transparency Directive and
refers to the obligation to conduct a joint pay assessment (Article 10). It is not applicable to ESRS
per se.
ESRS S1-17 Incidents, complaints and severe human rights impacts
Question ID 550 – Disclosure of discrimination/harassment cases
found inconclusive
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Is a company obliged to disclose a discrimination/harassment case that, upon investigation, was
found to lack conclusive evidence supporting the allegations (and hence was considered closed
without any supporting evidence)?
ESRS Reference
ESRS S1 paragraphs 103 (a) and AR 103
Key terms
Harassment; discrimination
Background
ESRS S1 paragraph 103 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose:
(a) the total number of incidents of discrimination, including harassment, reported in the
reporting period; …’
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 103 states: ‘In addition to the information required by paragraphs 103 and
104, the undertaking may disclose the status of incidents and/or complaints and actions with
reference to the following:
(a) incidents reviewed by the undertaking;
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 235 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
(b) remediation plans being implemented;
(c) remediation plans that have been implemented, with results reviewed through routine
internal management review processes; and
(d) incidents no longer subject to action.’
According to Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms, the term ‘incident’ is used when there is
‘a legal action or complaint registered with the undertaking or competent authorities through a
formal process, or an instance of non-compliance identified by the undertaking through
established procedures. Established procedures to identify instances of non-compliance can
include management system audits, formal monitoring programs, or grievance mechanisms.’
Answer
Yes, the total number of incidents of discrimination include all legal actions or complaints
registered through a formal process or instances of non-compliance identified through
established procedures (for example, grievance mechanisms). ESRS S1 paragraph AR 103 provides
the option to disclose the status of incidents and/or complaints as well as the actions that the
undertaking has taken. To note is that if the incident has been reported in the previous year, it
shall not be reported again in the current year.
ESRS S2 Policies related to value chain workers
ESRS S2 Policies related to value chain workers
Question ID 356 – Sub-contractors Scope S1, S2
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Are subcontractors included in own workforce, or are they to be included within the S2-
disclosures?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1 paragraph 4; ESRS S1 paragraph 5
Key terms
Own workforce; workers in the value chain
Background
The question received, ‘Are sub-consultants included in own workforce, or are they to be included
within the ESRS S2-disclosures?’ has been reworded into the above question to be clearer.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 236 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS S1 paragraph 4 states: ‘This Standard covers an undertaking’s own workforce, which is
understood to include both people who are in an employment relationship with the undertaking
(“employees”) and non-employees who are either people with contracts with the undertaking to
supply labour (“self-employed people”) or people provided by undertakings primarily engaged in
“employment activities” (NACE Code N78). See Application Requirement 3 for examples of who
falls under own workforce. The information required to be disclosed with regard to non-
employees shall not affect their status pursuant to applicable labour law.’
ESRS S1 paragraph 5 states: ‘This Standard does not cover workers in the undertaking’s upstream
or downstream value chain; these categories of workers are covered in ESRS S2 Workers in the
value chain.’
Answer
The definition of ‘non-employees’ only includes individual contractors supplying labour to the
undertaking (self-employed people) and people provided by undertakings primarily engaged in
employment activities (NACE Code N78). If they are not included in this definition, they shall be
considered workers in the value chain (ESRS S2).
ESRS S3 Affected communities
ESRS S3 Affected communities
Currently no explanations for this ESRS.
ESRS S4 Consumers and end-users
ESRS S4 Consumers and end-users
Question ID 1026 – Definition of end users
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Does the definition of end users include workers at the client?
ESRS Reference
ESRS S4; Annex II Acronyms and glossary of terms
Key terms
Accidents, work-related; business-to-business customers; consumers and end users; workers in
value chain
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 237 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Background
The following background was provided with the question: ‘If a company sells products B2B, is the
potential impact on those individuals to be assessed under S2 or S4? For example, a harbor has
ferry services and a truck driver who, having to use in their job a ferry to deliver goods, gets injured
because of lack of security in the harbor. Is the impact on that driver to be assessed under S2
(because the truck driver is considered to be a worker in the downstream value chain) or S4
(because the truck driver is considered an end user)?’
The ESRS define end users as individuals ‘who ultimately use or are intended to ultimately use a
particular product or service’. A value chain worker is defined as an ‘individual performing work in
the value chain of the undertaking, regardless of the existence or nature of any contractual
relationship with the undertaking’. This includes ‘all workers in the undertaking’s upstream and
downstream value chain who are or can be materially impacted by the undertaking (see Table 2
of Annex II of ESRS)’.
ESRS S1 Own Workforce, Disclosure Requirement S1-14 deals with reporting requirements for
work-related injuries and work-related cases of ill health, including those that involve workers from
companies other than the reporting undertaking as well as cases of work-related injuries and ill
health that happen during travel for working purposes. ESRS S1 paragraph 86 states that, apart
from cases of work-related injury and ill health among its own workforce, the reporting
undertaking must ‘also disclose the number of fatalities as a result of work-related injuries and
work-related ill health of other workers working on the undertaking’s sites’ (emphasis added).
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 84 states that an undertaking must also report incidents that happen to its
workforce while travelling for work, i.e. outside the undertaking’s own premises: ‘With regard to
travelling for work purposes, injuries and ill health that occur while a person is travelling are work-
related if, at the time of the injury or ill health, the person was engaged in work activities “in the
interest of the employer”. Examples of such activities include travelling to and from customer
contacts; conducting job tasks; and entertaining or being entertained to transact, discuss, or
promote business (at the direction of the employer).’
Answer
ESRS define ‘end users’ as ‘individuals who ultimately use’ a product or service. In the fact pattern
accompanying the question, which is reproduced in ‘Background’, this does not include workers
of a business customer of the reporting undertaking. Those workers may use services offered by
the undertaking, but they do so in the context of providing a service or producing a good on behalf
of their employers. Typically, such workers should be considered value chain workers.
In general terms, there can be circumstances where an undertaking’s negative impacts are the
same for workers in the value chain and end users. In any case, whatever the characteristics of
each situation, the undertaking must avoid double-counting the same impact by reporting it once
as an impact on its value chain workers and a second time as an impact on end users. When
appropriate, disclosing the approach used as contextual information may provide useful
information.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 238 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Questions related to Governance
ESRS G1 Business conduct
ESRS G1 Business conduct
Question ID 479 – Minimum disclosure requirements and ESRS G1
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Do MDRs have to be applied for matters that are to be reported following the ESRS G1?
ESRS reference
ESRS G1; ESRS 2 Section 4.2 paragraphs 63 to 81
Key terms
Minimum disclosure requirements
Background
ESRS 2 Section 4.2, paragraph 60 states that Minimum Disclosure Requirements (MDR) should ‘. .
. be included when the undertaking discloses information on its policies and actions to prevent,
mitigate and remediate actual and potential material impacts, to address material risks and/or to
pursue material opportunities (collectively, to “manage material sustainability matters”). They
shall be applied together with the Disclosure Requirements, including Application Requirements,
provided in the relevant topical and sector-specific ESRS.’
ESRS 2 Section 4.2, paragraph 70 establishes that Minimum Disclosure Requirements ‘shall be
included when the undertaking discloses information on its metrics and targets related to each
material sustainability matter. They shall be applied together with the Disclosure Requirements,
including Application Requirements, provided in the relevant topical ESRS.’
All the MDRs that shall be read in conjunction with the relevant topical ESRS, including those
affecting Policies, Actions, Targets and Metrics, are established in paragraphs 63 to 81 of ESRS 2.
Answer
The MDRs from paragraphs 63 to 81 in ESRS 2 shall be applied with respect to Policies, Actions,
Targets and Metrics in G1 irrespective of the fact that there is no cross-reference in the topical
standard.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 239 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS G1-4 Incidents of corruption or bribery
Question ID 417 - Convictions
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
What is the definition to be used for ‘convictions’? It could be different things: Number of
convictions of proceeding that are still open? Or started in the reporting year? Closed in the
reporting year? Appeal concluded? Not subject to appeal anymore?
ESRS reference
ESRS G1-4 paragraph 24 (a)
Key terms
Convictions
Background
ESRS G1 paragraph 24 states that: ‘The undertaking shall disclose:
(a) the number of convictions and the amount of fines for violation of anti-corruption and
anti- bribery laws; and
(b) any actions taken to address breaches in procedures and standards of anti-corruption
and anti-bribery.’
Based on EU Law and on the European Criminal Records Information System (ECRIS), the term
‘conviction’ is defined as ‘any final decision of a criminal court against a natural person in respect
of a criminal offence, to the extent that the decision is entered in the criminal records of the
convicting Member State’.
Answer
ESRS G1 uses the definition of ‘convictions’ derived from European Law. Based on EU Law and on
the European Criminal Records Information System (ECRIS), the term conviction is defined as ‘any
final decision of a criminal court against a natural person in respect of a criminal offence, to the
extent that the decision is entered in the criminal records of the convicting Member State’.
Therefore, the disclosure requirement applies to the number of convictions that fulfil the
definition of a final decision of a criminal court. This is understood in the general sense of the
term, i.e., that of the court of the first instance. This approach has the advantage of including all
the convictions in the reporting while awaiting the outcome of a possible appeal. The reporting
undertaking may provide additional information if an appeal is considered, has been lodged or
was successful as this would be relevant information to users.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 240 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Question ID 800 – Corruption and Bribery
Release date
November 2024
Question asked
Does an undertaking need to disclose the total number of incidents of corruption and the total
number of incidents of bribery, or is there some additional data needed about the ‘nature’ of each
type of incident?
ESRS Reference
ESRS G1-4 paragraphs 24 and 25
Key terms
Corruption; bribery
Background
ESRS G1 paragraph 24 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose:
(a) the number of convictions and the amount of fines for violation of anti-corruption and
anti-bribery laws; and
(b) any actions taken to address breaches in procedures and standards of anti-corruption and
anti-bribery.’
ESRS G1 paragraph 25 states: ‘The undertaking may disclose:
(a) the total number and nature of confirmed incidents of corruption or bribery …’
Answer
There is no requirement to distinguish between convictions or fines for corruption and those for
bribery in paragraph 24 of ESRS G1. Additional information about the nature of the conviction or
fine is voluntary.
‘Confirmed incidents of corruption/bribery’ is the subject of voluntary disclosures per paragraph
25 of ESRS G1, which requires disclosure of the nature. There is no concept of ‘incidents of
corruption or bribery’ in ESRS.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 241 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS G1-5 Political influence and lobbying activities
Question ID 510 – ESRS G1-5 Indirect political contributions and
lobbying activities
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
In ESRS G1-5, what is the dividing line between ‘indirect political contributions’, whose financial
or in-kind amounts must be disclosed according to paragraph 29 (b)(i) and AR 10, and ‘lobbying
activities’, whose financial or in-kind amounts may be disclosed as per AR 12?
ESRS reference
ESRS G1-5 paragraphs 29 (b), AR 10, and AR 12
Key terms
Political contributions, lobbying activities
Background
The concept of ‘political contributions’ is defined in AR 9 of ESRS G1-Business Conduct. This
paragraph states that political contributions refer to support provided directly to political parties,
their elected representatives or persons seeking political office.
The concept ‘indirect political contributions’ is defined in AR 10 of ESRS G1-Business Conduct. This
paragraph states that these refer to ‘those political contributions made through an intermediary
organisation such as a lobbyist or charity, or support given to an organisation such as a think tank
or trade association linked to or supporting particular political parties or causes.’
GRI, in its standard 415: Public Policy defines ‘indirect political contributions’ as ‘financial or in-
kind support to political parties, their representatives, or candidates for office made through an
intermediary organization such as a lobbyist or charity, or support given to an organization such
as a think tank or trade association linked to or supporting particular political parties or causes.’
The ESRS and GRI refer to ‘indirect political contributions’ as contributions linked to political
parties and political causes.
On the other hand, ‘lobbying activities’ as defined in Annex II of ESRS refer to ‘activities carried
out with the objective of influencing the formulation or implementation of policy or legislation,
or the decision-making processes of governments, governmental institutions, regulators,
European Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies or standard setters.’
Answer
Political contributions support political parties and/or election campaigns in their respective
political causes, and they can be direct or indirect. Indirect political contributions are made on
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 242 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
behalf of a company by an intermediary organisation, such as a think tank, a business association
or a charity. While political contributions are most commonly financial, e.g., donations, event
sponsorships or purchases of tickets at campaign or fundraising events, they can also be non-
financial (‘in kind’), e.g., providing certain services like printing of posters, website design or
permission to use facilities.
Lobbying, on the other hand, is about influencing policies, political decisions, laws and other
regulations, usually when they are being drafted or prepared but also in the implementation
stage. The typical targets of lobbying activities are therefore decision-makers in governments and
ministries, supervisory authorities and other government agencies as well as members of
parliaments and/or their assistants. Lobbying, too, can take direct or indirect forms. In the latter
case, the company entrusts the lobbying to a specialised service provider or to a not-for-profit
intermediary such as a business association.
Question ID 560 – Beneficiary of political contributions
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Undertakings are required, for financial or in-kind political contributions, to report the total
monetary value of financial and in-kind political contributions made directly and indirectly by the
undertaking, aggregated by country or geographical area where relevant, as well as the type of
recipient/beneficiary. Does that include a requirement to disclose the exact name of the
beneficiary or simply its type?
ESRS reference
ESRS G1-5 paragraph 29 (b)
Key terms
Political contributions, beneficiary
Background
ESRS G1-5 paragraph 29 states the following: ‘The disclosure required by paragraph 27 shall
include … (b) for financial or in-kind political contributions: (i) the total monetary value of financial
and in-kind political contributions made directly and indirectly by the undertaking, aggregated by
country or geographical area where relevant, as well as type of recipient/beneficiary ...’
Answer
The Disclosure Requirement refers to the type of recipient/beneficiary and does not extend to
the name of the beneficiary.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 243 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS G1-6 Payment practices
Question ID 419 – Legal proceedings currently outstanding for late
payments
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Regarding the number of currently outstanding legal proceedings for late payments, are you
referring to ‘currently outstanding’ that remained opened in the reporting year or also closed in
the reporting year?
ESRS reference
ESRS G1 paragraph 33 (c)
Key terms
Late payments; legal proceedings
Background
ESRS G1 paragraph 33 (c) refers to the ‘number of legal proceedings currently outstanding for late
payments’ when stating what the disclosure under paragraph 31 shall include, under G1-6
Payment Practices.
Answer
The Disclosure Requirement refers specifically to those legal proceedings that have not been
legally resolved at year-end. Further information or additional remarks regarding closed legal
proceedings related to late payments during the year may be disclosed under ESRS G1 paragraph
33 (d), which states that the undertaking shall disclose ‘complementary information necessary to
provide sufficient context’.
Question ID 444 - Payment practices
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Regarding the DR on payment practices in G1-6, is the information on payment practices only
expected regarding SMEs or a wider range of suppliers?
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 244 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS G1-6
Key terms
Payment practices; late payments
Background
ESRS G1 paragraph 2 presents the list of matters covered in the standard, which are collectively
referred to as ‘business conduct or business conduct matters’. Paragraph 2 (b) clarifies that ‘the
management of relationships with suppliers, including payment practices, especially with regard
to late payments to small and medium-sized undertakings’.
Disclosure Requirement G1-6 paragraph 31 states that ‘the undertaking shall provide information
on its payment practices’.
ESRS G1 paragraph 32 states that ‘The objective of this Disclosure Requirement (G1-6) is to
provide insights on the contractual payment terms and on its performance with regard to
payment, especially as to how these impact SMEs and specifically with respect to late payments
to SMEs.’
Answer
The information on payment practices is not limited to SMEs but regarding all suppliers.
However, the list of ‘shall’ data points in ESRS G1 paragraph 33 has to be read in the context of
the disclosure objective, which refers ‘especially’ to SMEs. Undertakings are expected, as part of
ESRS G1 paragraph 33 (d), to provide complementary information, if material, to provide sufficient
context, including information on payment practices specific to SMEs; for example, because there
are significant differences in payment practices vis-a-vis large and SME business partners.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 245 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Questions related to XBRL and datapoints
Question ID 326 – Implementation of datapoints
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Why are some ESRS paragraphs and Application Requirements (AR) implemented as separate
datapoints in IG 3 List of ESRS Datapoints and some are not?
ESRS reference
IG 3 List of ESRS Data Points
Key terms
List of datapoints
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 16 states: ‘ESRS structure the information to be disclosed under Disclosure
Requirements. Each Disclosure Requirement consists of one or more distinct datapoints. The term
“datapoint” can also refer to a narrative sub-element of a Disclosure Requirement.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 18 states: ‘ESRS use the following terms to distinguish between different
degrees of obligation on the undertaking to disclose information:
(a) “shall disclose” – indicates that the provision is prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement
or datapoint;
(b) “may disclose” – indicates voluntary disclosure to encourage good practice.
In addition, ESRS use the term “shall consider” when referring to issues resources or
methodologies that the undertaking is expected to take into account or to use in the preparation
of a given disclosure if applicable.’
IG 3 List of ESRS Data Points – Explanatory note and the ESRS XBRL Taxonomy provide non-
authoritative implementation guidance on the datapoints required by ESRS. It supports the
application of sector-agnostic ESRS adopted as delegated act on 31 July 2023 (see EFRAG IG 3 List
of ESRS data points – Explanatory note chapter Content and objective of this Implementation
Guidance).
ESRS E1 paragraph 36 states: ‘The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an
understanding of the undertaking’s total energy consumption in absolute value, improvement in
energy efficiency, exposure to coal, oil and gas-related activities, and the share of renewable
energy in its overall energy mix.’
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 246 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ESRS E1 paragraph AR36 states: ‘When preparing the information on energy intensity required
under paragraph 40, the undertaking shall:
(a) calculate the energy intensity ratio using the following formula: …‘
ESRS E1 paragraph AR38 states: ‘The reconciliation of net revenue from activities in high climate
impact sectors to the relevant financial statements line item or disclosure (as required by
paragraph 43) may be presented either:
(a) by a cross-reference to the related line item or disclosure in the financial statements;
or
(b) if the net revenue cannot be directly cross-referenced to a line item or disclosure in
the financial statements, by a quantitative reconciliation using the below tabular
format. …‘
Answer
IG 3 List of Data Points – Explanatory note (as well as the ESRS XBRL Taxonomy) have dedicated
and separate items only for the individual datapoints of ESRS Disclosure Requirements. The
datapoints are often indicated by terms equal or similar to ‘shall disclose’, ‘shall describe’ or ‘may
disclose’. All paragraphs of ESRS 1, and some paragraphs and Application Requirements of the
other topical ESRS, provide objectives, methodological guidance or other guidance that are to be
considered when preparing or disclosing sustainability statements according to ESRS. Those
paragraphs are not implemented as separate datapoints.
The following examples illustrate when paragraphs in ESRS are considered separate datapoints or
not:
(a) ESRS E1 paragraph 36: Not a datapoint because it describes the objective of the disclosure
requirement E1-5 on Energy Consumption.
(b) ESRS E1 paragraph AR 36: Not a data point because it provides calculation guidance on
the energy consumption.
(c) ESRS E1 paragraph AR 38, implemented as separate data point, due to the character of
the Application Requirement which defines how the reconciliation of net revenue from
activities in high climate impact sectors to the relevant financial statements line item or
disclosure may be presented.
(d) Application Requirements that are part of the narrative disclosure of their associated
Disclosure Requirements or datapoint are not designated as separate datapoints. An
example would be ESRS E1 paragraph 20 (a) and the related AR 9, detailing the
information to be provided under ESRS E1 paragraph 20 (a).
(e) Application Requirements marked with ‘shall consider’ have not been included as
separate datapoints, e.g., ESRS 2 paragraph AR 14 relating to ESRS 2 paragraph 42.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 247 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Appendix I: Table of ID release date
The date IDs were issued by EFRAG is as follows:
November 2024
ID 177 - Mapping of sustainability matters to topical disclosures (Q&A ID 177)
ID 271 – Difference between work-related accident and work-related injury
ID 283 - Is waste incineration a disposal operation
ID 339 - Use of secondary data, social protection
ID 389 – Annual total remuneration ratio and types of workers
ID 400 – recycled waste
ID 408 – Categorisation of waste streams
ID 430 - Definition of gender
ID 434 - Difference non-employees, value chain workers
ID 438 - Treatment of non-material datapoints
ID 453 – Social protection; parental leave
ID 455 – Contextual information and consolidated data for water consumption
ID 456 - Policies on water treatment
ID 472 - Major incidents and deposits
ID 473 - Restrictions due to national regulations
ID 526 and ID 1021 – Disclosure of a non-material datapoint (water-consumption in own
operations) related to a (a) material and (b) non-material topic
ID 531 - Base year
ID 549 - Gender pay gap; collective wage arrangements
ID 550 - Disclosure of discrimination / harassment cases found inconclusive
ID 619 – Air emissions in ESRS E2 versus ESRS E1
ID 644 - Limits of fossil fuel sector
ID 648 - Substances of (very high) concern - including entity-specific disclosures
ID 653 - Microplastics - tires wear
ID 676 – Water metrics in the value chain
ID 689 – Gender Pay Gap; Gender
ID 690 – Gender Pay Gap; Pay Transparency Directive
ID 713 and ID 928 – Microplastics – definition and REACH update
ID 730 – Type of employee, social protection
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 248 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ID 734 - Disclosure of progress in meeting climate-related targets
ID 753 - Financial materiality in the value chain and power purchase agreements
ID 776 – Pollutants emissions – granularity
ID 800 - Corruption and Bribery
ID 815 – Substances of concern – in articles
ID 831 - Contractual instruments
ID 832 – Pollutants emissions – changes over time
ID 873 - Transport of removed GHGs
ID 882 – Data availability for biogenic emissions in Scope 3
ID 893 - Conversion factor fossil fuels
ID 905 - Manufacture of chemicals / pesticides and other agrochemical products
ID 923 - Phase-in entity specific disclosure
ID 935 - Financial effects - current vs anticipated
ID 952 – Metrics - rounding and decimals; materiality of information
ID 953 – Mandatory disclosures of material metrics on Biodiversity
ID 968 – Ecolabel
ID 1013 – Potential discrepancy in variable remuneration between ESRS 2 and ESRS E1
ID 1019 – Sustainability matter expected to become material in the future
ID 1025 – Direct drivers of biodiversity loss – definition
ID 1026 – Definition of end-users
ID 1039 – time horizon - only long-term material
ID 1047 – Conditions for incorporation by reference and content index
ID 1048 – Disclosure of datapoint(s) related to a non-material Disclosure Requirement
for a metric
ID 1054 - short-term, length of the period
ID 1056 – MDR-Actions and resources allocated
ID 1060 – Pollution - affected communities consultations
ID 1072 - DR GOV-1 - ESG expertise of governance bodies
ID 1090 – Length of transitional provisions for early adopters
ID 1115 – Disclosing the number and area of sites near or in biodiversity-sensitive areas
ID 1126 – Heating values and geographical location of undertaking
ID 1136 - Targets without policy
ID 1144 - Phase-in 750 employees: Calculation of average
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 249 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ID 1172 – Disclosure of the area of sites in or near biodiversity-sensitive area
ID 1297 – Level of disaggregation
July 2024
ID 29 and ID 261 – ‘May’ and ‘shall’ reporting requirements
ID 245 – Climate-risk analysis
ID 268 – GHG emissions, annual update
ID 338 – Activities in high-climate impact sectors
ID 395 – Revenue/net revenue
ID 414 – Disaggregation of total emissions
ID 422 – Assets at risk, disclosure of monetary amount
ID 429 – Entity-specific and ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirements
ID 432 – Net zero target and GHG removals
ID 535 – Emission trading schemes
ID 536 – Carbon credit – Quality standard
ID 555 – Financial effects and climate risk
ID 577 – GHG removals – project definition
ID 636 – Definition of types of removals
ID 698 – Database for GHG emission factors
ID 718 – Disaggregation of GHG emissions
ID 728 – Representation of employees and other workers
ID 733 – Overlap of ESRS 2 and topical standards
ID 762 – Location of policies, actions and targets in the sustainability report
ID 781 – General Meeting
ID 802 - Reference lists of biodiversity-sensitive areas
ID 821 – Risk and opportunity for financial materiality
ID 863 – Metrics calculation – annual average
ID 906 – Structure of the sustainability statement – annex/appendix possible?
ID 910 – Transitional provisions for value chain and Scope 3 GHG
May 2024
ID 32 – Methodology for presenting information on employees
ID 41 – Financial institutions – scope of reporting boundary
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 250 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ID 148 – Scope of consolidation for non-EU and unconsolidated subsidiaries
ID 172 – Materiality assessment – private equity structures
ID 185 – Objective evidence and stakeholders’ opinion
ID 186 – Substances of very high concern
ID 201 – Oil spill – Chemical spill
ID 208 – GHG emission calculation
ID 226 and 301– Substances of (very high) concern and hazard classes
ID 251 – Emission factors disclosure
ID 286 – Financial year different from calendar year
ID 291 – Phase-in 750 employees and topical standards
ID 293 – Relationship of strategy and policy
ID 296 – Location of ESRS 2 related Disclosure Requirement of topical standards
ID 306 – Location of MDR in the report during phase-in 750 employees
ID 326 – Implementation of data points
ID 335 – Applicability of EU datapoints – Appendix B
ID 337 – Metrics calculation – same level of precision
ID 340 – Entitlement family-related leave
ID 341 – Conditions for Paternity, Maternity, Parental Leave
ID 350 – Gross risk
ID 352 – Work-related ill health and fatalities from ill health
ID 356 – Sub-contractors Scope S1, S2
ID 365 – Significant employment
ID 376 – Definition of collective bargaining
ID 387 – Scope of ESRS S1-16
ID 395 – Net Revenue
ID 401 – Include quantitative information in qualitative information
ID 417 – Convictions
ID 419 – Legal proceedings currently outstanding for late payments
ID 426 – Structure of the sustainability statement
ID 440 – Pollutants emissions – disaggregation
ID 441 – Microplastics
ID 442 – Entity-specific metrics
ID 444 – Payment practices
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 251 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ID 461 – Sustainability statement – ESRS 1 Flowchart E and Disclosure of transition plans
and processes
ID 479 – Minimum Disclosure Requirements in ESRS G1
ID 482 – Breakdown of total revenue - financial institutions
ID 504 – Disclosure Requirements on material metrics when information is not available
ID 510 – ESRS G1-5 – Political influence and lobbying activities
ID 517 – Disclosure of thresholds
ID 552 – Comparative information
ID 560 – Beneficiary of political contributions
ID 628 – Content Index
March 2024
ID 31 – Breakdown of temporary, permanent, non-guaranteed hours employees
ID 37 – Positive impact only
ID 38 – Structure of the sustainability statement
ID 67 – Disclosure Requirement SBM-3 vocabulary / grammar used
ID 132 – Gender pay gap
ID 171 and ID 358 – Administrative, management and supervisory bodies
ID 204 – Phase-in for first-time large undertakings
ID 206 – Climate related targets
ID 214 – Resources to manage material impacts
ID 215 – Social dialogue global percentage
ID 217 – Prudential consolidation
ID 243 – Reference to financial statements
February 2024
ID 33 – Definitions of non-employees
ID 36 – Energy mix
ID 39 – SBM-1 sector breakdown and phase-in
ID 43 - Scope 3 GHG emissions for insurance companies
ID 58 – Transitional provisions 750 employees
ID 81 – Subsidiaries, holding company – alignment for GHG protocol
ID 106 - Entity-specific guidance and examples
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 252 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
ID 109 – Bold text and Disclosure Requirement E1-6
ID 157 – ESRS 2 GOV disclosures and specifications in the topical ESRS
ID 162 - Minimum number of material matters
ID 167 - GHG Protocol Scope 3; Sector
ID 180 – Time horizon: impact versus financial materiality
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 253 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Appendix II: Key word index
KEY WORDS ID reference
Accidents, work-related Question ID 352 - Work-related ill health and
fatalities from ill health, Question ID 1026 –
Definition of end-users
Actions and targets Question ID 762 – Location of policies, actions
and targets in the sustainability report
Affected community Question ID 1060 – Pollution – affected
communities’ consultations
Agrochemical products Question ID 905 – Manufacture of
chemicals/pesticides and other agrochemical
products
Air pollution Question ID 619 – Air emissions in ESRS E2
versus ESRS E1
Administrative, management, and Question ID 171 & ID 358 - Administrative
supervisory bodies management and supervisory bodies
Alignment in methodology Question ID 81 - Subsidiaries and holding
company - alignment for GHG protocol
Annual average Question ID 863 – Metrics calculation –
annual average
Annual total remuneration Question ID 1013 – Potential discrepancy in
variable remuneration between ESRS 2 and
ESRS E1, Question ID 389 – Annual total
remuneration ratio and types of workers
Anticipated financial effects Question ID 472 – Major incidents and
deposits, ID 935 – Financial effects – current
versus anticipated
Area of site Question ID 1172 – Disclosure of the area of
sites in or near biodiversity-sensitive area
Articles Question ID 815 – Substances of concern – in
articles
Assets at risk Question ID 422 – Asset at risk, disclosure of
monetary amount
Base year Question ID 552 – Comparative information,
Question ID 531 – Base year
Biodiversity loss Question ID 1025 – Direct drivers of
biodiversity loss – definition
Biodiversity-sensitive areas Question ID 802 - Reference lists of
biodiversity-sensitive areas, Question ID 1115
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 254 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
– Disclosing the number and area of sites near
or in biodiversity-sensitive areas, Question ID
1172 – Disclosure of the area of sites in or
near biodiversity-sensitive area
Biogenic emissions Question ID 776 – Pollutants emissions –
granularity, Question ID 882 – Data availability
for biogenic emissions in Scope 3
Bolded paragraph Question ID 109 - Bold text and ESRS E1
Disclosure Requirements E1-6
Breakdown Question ID 430 – Definition of Gender
Breakdown of total revenue Question ID 482 – Breakdown of total revenue
– financial institutions
Bribery Question ID 800 – Corruption and Bribery
Business-to-business costumers Question ID 1026 – Definition of end-users
Carbon credit Question ID 536 – Carbon credit – Quality
standard
Chemicals Question ID 905 – Manufacture of
chemicals/pesticides and other agrochemical
products
Chemical spills Question ID 201 – Oil spills – Chemical spills
Consumers and end users Question ID 1026 – Definition of end-users
Financial year different from Question ID 286 - Financial year different
calendar Year from calendar year
Categorisation of the general Question ID 781 – General Meeting
meeting
Climate risk Question ID 555 – Financial effects and
climate risk, Question ID 245 – Climate-risk
analysis
Climate-related targets Question ID 734 – Disclosure of progress in
meeting climate-related targets
Collective bargaining agreement Question ID 376 - Definition of collective
bargaining
Collective wage agreements Question ID 549 – Gender pay gap; collective
wage agreements
Comparative information Question ID 552 – Comparative information,
Question ID 1090 – Length of transitional
provisions for early adopters
Content index Question ID 628 – Content index, Question ID
906 – Structure of sustainability statement –
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 255 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
annex/appendix possible?, Question ID 1047
– Conditions for incorporation by reference
and content index
Context info Question ID 455 – Contextual information and
consolidated data for water consumption
Contractual instruments Question ID 831 – Contractual instruments
Conversion factors Question ID 893 – Conversion factor fossil
fuels
Consolidated data Question ID 455 – Contextual information and
consolidated data for water consumption
Convictions Question ID 417 - Convictions
Corruption Question ID 800 – Corruption and Bribery
Cross-reference to financial Question ID 24 - Reference to financial
statements statements
Current financial effects Question ID 935 – Financial effects – current
versus anticipated
Datapoints Question ID 326 – Implementation of
datapoints, Question ID 438 – Treatment of
non-material datapoints, e.g. radioactive
waste – can it be a non-material datapoint?,
Question ID 1048 – Disclosure of datapoint(s)
related to a non-material Disclosure
Requirement for a metric
Data availability Question ID 776 – Pollutants emissions –
granularity, Question ID 882 – Data availability
for biogenic emissions in Scope 3
Data collection Question ID 473 – Restrictions due to national
regulations
Data protection Question ID 473 – Restrictions due to national
regulations
Days lost Question ID 352 - Work-related ill health and
fatalities from ill health
Decimals rounding Question ID 952 – Metrics – rounding and
decimals; materiality of information
Deposit Question ID 472 – Major incidents and
deposits
Direct impact drivers of biodiversity Question ID 1025 – Direct drivers of
loss biodiversity loss – definition
Disclosure of thresholds Question ID 517 – Disclosure of thresholds
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 256 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Disclosure of transition plans Question ID 461- Sustainability statement -
ESRS 1 flowchart E and disclosure of transition
plans
Disclosure requirement Question ID 177 - Mapping of sustainability
matters to topical disclosures (Q&A ID 177)
Discrimination Question ID 550 – Disclosure of
discrimination/harassment cases found
inconclusive
Early adopters Question ID 1090 – Length of transitional
provisions for early adopters
Ecolabel Question ID 968 – Ecolabel
Emission trading schemes Question ID 535 – Emission trading schemes
Employees Question ID 33 - Breakdown of temporary,
permanent, and non-guaranteed hours
employees, Question ID 243 - Reference to
financial statements, Question ID 365 -
Significant employment, Question ID 387 -
Scope of ESRS S1-16
Employees, global percentage Question ID 215 - Social dialogue global
parentage
Employees permanent Question ID 31- Breakdown of temporary,
permanent, and non-guaranteed hours
employees
Employees temporary Question ID 31- Breakdown of temporary,
permanent, and non-guaranteed hours
employees
Energy consumption Question ID 36 - Energy mix, Question ID 1126
– Heating values and geographical location of
undertaking
Entity-specific disclosures Question ID 106 - Entity-specific guidance
examples, Question ID 442 – Entity-specific
metrics, Question ID 429 – Entity-specific and
ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirements, Question ID
923 – Phase-in entity-specific disclosures
ESRS 1 Appendix E Question ID 461- Sustainability statement -
ESRS 1 flowchart E and disclosure of transition
plans
ESRS 2 Appendix B (other EU Question ID 335 - Applicability of EU data
legislation) points - Appendix B
ESRS 2 related disclosures in topical Question ID 157 - ESRS 2 Disclosure
standards Requirement GOV, and specification in the
topical ESRS , Question ID 291 - Phase-in 750
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 257 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
employees and topical standards, Question ID
296 – Location of ESRS-2 related Disclosure
Requirements in topical standards, Question
ID 733 – Overlap of ESRS 2 and topical
standards
ESRS Disclosure Requirements Question ID 1047 – Conditions for
incorporation by reference and content index
ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1- Question ID 109 - Bold text and ESRS E1
6 Disclosure Requirement E1-6
ESRS E5 Disclosure Requirement E5- Question ID 401- Include quantitative
5 information in qualitative information
ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1- Question ID 24 - Reference to financial
6 statements
EESRS S3 Question ID 1060 – Pollution – affected
communities’ consultations
Estimates Question ID 339 – Use of secondary data and
social protection
EU data-points Question ID 335 - Applicability of EU data
points - Appendix B, Question ID 906 –
Structure of sustainability statement –
annex/appendix possible?, Question ID 968 –
Ecolabel
Expertise and skills, sustainability Question ID 1072 – ESRS 2 GOV-1 – ESG
related expertise of governance bodies
External body Question ID 952 – Metrics – rounding and
decimals; materiality of information,
Question ID 968 – Ecolabel
Family-related leave Question ID 340 – Entitlement to family-
related leave
Fatalities Question ID 352 - Work-related ill health and
fatalities from ill health
Female Question ID 430 – Definition of Gender
Financial effects Question ID 555- Financial effects and climate
risk, ID 935 – Financial effects – current versus
anticipated
Financial institutions Question ID 41 - Financial institutions - scope
of reporting boundary, Question ID 482 –
Breakdown of total revenue – financial
institutions
Financial investments Question ID 43 - Scope 3 GHG emissions for
insurance companies
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 258 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Financial materiality Question ID 180 - Time horizon: impact versus
financial materiality, Question ID 821 – Risk
and opportunity for financial materiality,
Question ID 555- Financial effects and climate
risk, Question ID 753– Financial materiality in
the value chain and power purchase
agreements
Financial year Question ID 286 - Financial year different
from calendar year
First-time large undertaking Question ID 204 - Phase-in for first-time large
undertakings
Fossil fuel Question ID 893 – Conversion factor fossil
fuels, Question ID 644 – Limits of fossil fuel
sector
FTE Question ID 32 – Methodology for presenting
information on employees
Gender Pay Gap Question ID 132 - Gender pay gap, Question
ID 387 - Scope of ESRS S1-16, Question ID 549
– Gender pay gap; collective wage
agreements, Question ID 689 – Gender Pay
Gap and gender
GHG emissions Question ID 698 – Database for GHG emission
factors
GHG emission, annual update Question ID 268 – GHG emissions, annual
update
GHG emission calculation Question ID 208 - GHG emission calculation
GHG emissions disaggregation Question ID 718 – Disaggregation of GHG
emissions
GHG emission factors Question ID 251- Emission factors disclosure
GHG emission factor database Question ID 698 – Database for GHG emission
factors
GHG emission reduction Question ID 206 - Climate-related targets
GHG protocol Question ID 81 - Subsidiaries and holding
company - alignment for GHG protocol
GHG removal Question ID 206 - Climate-related targets,
Question ID 432 – Net zero target and GHG
removals. Question ID 577 – GHG removals –
project definition, Question ID 873 –
Transport of removed GHGs
GHG storage Question ID 873 – Transport of removed
GHGs
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 259 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Granularity Question ID 776 – Pollutants emissions –
granularity
Gross risk Question ID 350 - Gross risk
Gross wage Question ID 132 - Gender pay gap
Harassment Question ID 550 – Disclosure of
discrimination/harassment cases found
inconclusive
Heating values Question ID 1126 – Heating values and
geographical location of undertaking
Holding companies Question ID 81 - Subsidiaries and holding
company - alignment for GHG protocol
Impact categories Question ID 698 – Database for GHG
emissionfactors
Impact materiality Question ID 180 - Time horizon: impact versus
financial materiality
Impact sectors ID 338 – Activities in high-climate impact
sectors
Impacts on biodiversity Question ID 1115 – Disclosing the number
and area of sites near or in biodiversity-
sensitive areas
Incorporation by reference Question ID 1047 – Conditions for
incorporation by reference and content index
Information to employees Question ID 32 – Methodology for presenting
information on employees
Insurance companies Question ID 41 - Financial institutions - scope
of reporting boundary, Question ID 43 - Scope
3 GHG emissions for insurance companies
Intensity-emission target Question ID 531 – Base year
Investment activities Question ID 41 - Financial institutions - scope
of reporting boundary
IPCC Question ID 208 - GHG emission calculation
ISO Question ID 208 - GHG emission calculation
Late payments Question ID 419 - Legal proceedings currently
outstanding for late payments , Question ID
444 - Payment practices
Leave – family related Question ID 341 - Conditions for paternity,
maternity, parental leave
Level of disaggregation Question ID 1297 – Level of disaggregation
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 260 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Level of disclosure Question ID 560 – Beneficiary of political
contributions
Location Question ID 1126 – Heating values and
geographical location of undertaking
Lobbying activities Question ID 510 - Political influence and
lobbying activities
Major incident Question ID 472 – Major incidents and
deposits
Male Question ID 430 – Definition of Gender
Mapping sustainability matters Question ID 177 - Mapping of sustainability
matters to topical disclosures (Q&A ID 177)
Mandatory Question ID 953 – Mandatory disclosures of
material metrics on Biodiversity
Materiality Question ID 37 Positive impact only, Question
ID 43 - Scope 3 GHG emissions for insurance
companies, Question ID 185 - Objective
evidence and stakeholders’ opinion, Question
ID 337 – Metrics calculation – same level of
precision, Question ID 952 – Metrics –
rounding and decimals; materiality of
information
Material metrics Question ID 504 – Disclosure Requirements
on material metrics when information is not
available, Question ID 952 – Metrics –
rounding and decimals; materiality of
information
Matters not covered by ESRS 2 Question ID 442 – Entity-specific metrics
Disclosure Requirements
MDR-Actions Question ID 1056 – MDR-Actions and
resources allocated
Metrics Question ID 286 - Financial year different
from calendar year, Question ID 401 - Include
quantitative information in qualitative
information, Question ID 863 – Metrics
calculation – annual average, Question ID 952
– Metrics – rounding and decimals;
materiality of information, Question ID 1048
– Disclosure of datapoint(s) related to a non-
material Disclosure Requirement for a metric,
Question ID 953 – Mandatory disclosures of
material metrics on Biodiversity, Question ID
676 – Water metrics in the value chain
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 261 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Microplastics Question ID 441 - Microplastics, Question ID
832 – Pollutants emissions – changes over
time, Question ID 653 – Microplastics – tires
wear, Question ID 713 and ID 928 –
Microplastics – definition and REACH update,
Question ID 776 – Pollutants emissions –
granularity
Minimum number of material Question ID 162 - Minimum number of
sustainability matters material matters
Minimum disclosure requirements Question ID 306 - Location of MDR in the
report during phase-in 750 employees,
Question ID 461 - Sustainability statement -
ESRS 1 flowchart E and disclosure of transition
plans, Question ID 479 - Minimum disclosure
requirements in ESRS G1
Multiple sites Question ID 455 – Contextual information and
consolidated data for water consumption
National law Question ID 473 – Restrictions due to national
regulations
Net revenue Question ID 395 – Revenue/net revenue
Net turnover Question ID 395 – Revenue/net revenue
Non-GHG emissions Question ID 619 – Air emissions in ESRS E2
versus ESRS E1
Net-zero targets Question ID 432 – Net zero target and GHG
removals
Non-consolidated subsidiaries Question ID 148 - Scope of consolidation for
non-EU and unconsolidated subsidiaries
Non-employees Question ID 33 - Definition of non-employees,
Question ID 434 – Difference between non-
employees and value chain workers
Non-financial undertakings Question ID 335 - Applicability of EU data
points - Appendix B
Non-graduated employees Question ID 31 - Breakdown of temporary,
permanent, and non-guaranteed hours
employees
Non-EU subsidiaries Question ID 148 - Scope of consolidation for
non-EU and unconsolidated subsidiaries
Non-material Question ID 438 – Treatment of non-material
datapoints, e.g. radioactive waste – can it be
a non-material datapoint?, Question ID 526
and ID 1021 – Disclosure of a non-material
datapoint (water-consumption in own
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 262 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
operations) related to a (a) material and (b)
non-material topic
Non-material datapoint Question ID 526 and ID 1021 – Disclosure of a
non-material datapoint (water-consumption
in own operations) related to a (a) material
and (b) non-material topic
Non-material Disclosure Question ID 1048 – Disclosure of datapoint(s)
Requirement related to a non-material Disclosure
Requirement for a metric
Nuclear sources Question ID 36 - Energy mix
Objective evidence Question ID 185 - Objective evidence and
stakeholders’ opinion
Oil spill Question ID 201 – Oil spills – Chemical spills
Own operations Question ID 41 - Financial institutions - scope
of reporting boundary
Ozone depleting substances Question ID 619 – Air emissions in ESRS E2
versus ESRS E1
Parental leave Question ID 453 – Social protection and
parental leave
Payment practices Question ID 444 - Payment practices
Pay Transparency Directive Question ID 689 – Gender Pay Gap and
gender
Pesticides Question ID 905 – Manufacture of
chemicals/pesticides and other agrochemical
products
Phase-in requirements Question ID 204 - Phase-in for first time large
undertakings, Question ID 923 – Phase-in
entity-specific disclosures, Question ID 1144 –
Phase-in 750 employees: Calculation of
average number, Question ID 1090 – Length
of transitional provisions for early adopters,
Phase-in less than 750 employees Question ID 58 - Transitional provisions 750
employees, Question ID 291 - Phase-in 750
employees and topical standards, Question ID
306 - Location of MDR in the report during
phase-in 750 employees, Question ID 1144 –
Phase-in 750 employees: Calculation of
average number
Physical risk Question ID 350 - Gross risk
Policies Question ID 293 - Relationship of strategy and
policy, Question ID 762 – Location of policies,
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 263 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
actions and targets in the sustainability
report, Question ID 1136 – Targets without
policy
Political contributions Question ID 510 - ESRS G1-5 Political influence
and lobbying activities, Question ID 560 –
Beneficiary of political contributions
Pollutant disaggregation Question ID 440 - Pollutants emissions -
disaggregation
Pollution Question ID 832 – Pollutants emissions –
changes over time, Question ID 776 –
Pollutants emissions – granularity, Question
ID 1060 – Pollution – affected communities’
consultations
Positive impact only material Question ID 37 - Positive impact only
Potential appendix Question ID 906 – Structure of sustainability
statement – annex/appendix possible?
Power purchase agreements Question ID 753– Financial materiality in the
value chain and power purchase agreements
Private equity Question ID 171 & ID 358 – Administrative,
management and supervisory bodies
Procurement Question ID 815 – Substances of concern – in
articles
Progress Question ID 734 – Disclosure of progress in
meeting climate-related targets
Project definition Question ID 577 – GHG removals – project
definition
Proxies Question ID 776 – Pollutants emissions –
granularity, Question ID 882 – Data availability
for biogenic emissions in Scope 3
Prudential consolidation Question ID 217 - Prudential consolidation
Quality standards for carbon credits Question ID 536 – Carbon credit – Quality
standard
Quantitative metrics Question ID 401 - Include quantitative
information in qualitative information
Radioactive waste Question ID 438 – Treatment of non-material
datapoints, e.g. radioactive waste – can it be
a non-material datapoint?
Rate of recordable work-related Question ID 271 / 287– Difference between
accidents work-related accident and work-related injury
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 264 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
REACH Question ID 713 and ID 928 – Microplastics –
definition and REACH update
Regulation 2023/2055 Question ID 713 and ID 928 – Microplastics –
definition and REACH update
Relevance Question ID 43 - Scope 3 GHG emissions for
insurance companies
Removal, biogenic Question ID 636 – Definition of types of
removals
Removal and storage of land use Question ID 636 – Definition of types of
removals
Removal technological and storage Question ID 636 – Definition of types of
removals
Removal, hybrid and storage Question ID 636 – Definition of types of
removals
Remuneration Question ID 1013 – Potential discrepancy in
variable remuneration between ESRS 2 and
ESRS E1
Reporting boundary Question ID 41 - Financial institutions - scope
of reporting boundary
Resources allocated Question ID 1056 – MDR-Actions and
resources allocated
Resource outflows Question ID 401 - Include quantitative
information in qualitative information
Representation of employees and Question ID 728 – Representation of
other workers employees and other workers
Resources to manage material Question ID 214 - Resources to manage
impacts material impacts
Revenue Question ID 395 – Revenue/net revenue
Salary - variable components Question ID 132 - Gender pay gap
Scope Question ID 268 – GHG emissions reporting,
Scope 2 Question ID 776 – Pollutants emissions –
granularity, Question ID 882 – Data availability
for biogenic emissions in Scope 3, Question ID
831 – Contractual instruments
Scope 3 Question ID 776 – Pollutants emissions –
granularity, Question ID 882 – Data availability
for biogenic emissions in Scope 3
Scope S1, S2 Question ID 356 – Sub-contractors Scope S1,
S2
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 265 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Scope 3 GHG emissions Question ID 43 - Scope 3 GHG emissions for
insurance companies, Question ID 167 - GHG
protocol scope 3; sector, Question ID 910 –
Transitional provisions for value chain and
Scope 3 GHG
Secondary data Question ID 339 – Use of secondary data and
social protection
Sector breakdown Question ID 39 - SBM-1 sector breakdown and
phase-in
Sex, breakdown Question ID 430 – Definition of Gender
Significant employment Question ID 215 - Social dialogue global
percentage, Question ID 365 - Significant
employment, Question ID 387 - Scope of ESRS
S1-16
SoC Question ID 226 and 301– Substances of (very
high) concern and hazard classes, Question ID
648 – Substances of (very high) concern –
including entity-specific disclosures, Question
ID 815 – Substances of concern – in articles
Social dialogue Question ID 215 - Social dialogue global
percentage
Social protection Question ID 339 – Use of secondary data and
social protection, Question ID 730 – Type of
employee and social protection
Stakeholder opinion Question ID 185 - Objective evidence and
stakeholders’ opinion
Strategy Question ID 293 - Relationship of strategy and
policy
Structure of the sustainability Question ID 38 - Structure of the sustainability
statement statement, Question ID 426 – Structure of the
sustainability statement, Question ID 733 –
Overlap of ESRS 2 and topical standards
Question ID 762 – Location of policies, actions
and targets in the sustainability report,
Question ID 906 – Structure of sustainability
statement – annex/appendix possible?
Substances of concern Question ID 186 – Substances of very high
concern, Question ID 226 and 301–
Substances of (very high) concern and hazard
classes, Question ID 648 – Substances of (very
high) concern – including entity-specific
disclosures, Question ID 815 – Substances of
concern – in articles
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 266 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Substances of very high concern Question ID 648 – Substances of (very high)
concern – including entity-specific disclosures
Sustainability matters generating Question ID 821 – Risk and opportunity for
sustainability risks or opportunities financial materiality
Sustainability related Question ID 1072 – ESRS 2 GOV-1 – ESG
expertise of governance bodies
SVHC Question ID 186 – Substances of very high
concern, Question ID 226 and 301–
Substances of (very high) concern and hazard
classes, Question ID 648 – Substances of (very
high) concern – including entity-specific
disclosures
Targets Question ID 1136 – Targets without policy
Time horizon Question ID 180 - Time horizon: impact versus
financial materiality, Question ID 1039 – Time
horizon – only long-term material, Question
ID 1054 – Short-term time horizon
Tires wear Question ID 653 – Microplastics – tires wear
Total Emissions Question ID 414 – Disaggregation of total
emissions
Transition risk Question ID 350 - Gross risk
Transport Question ID 873 – Transport of removed
GHGs
Transitional provisions Question ID 58 - Transitional provisions 750
employees, Question ID 204 - Phase-in for
first-time large undertakings, Question ID 291
- Phase-in 750 employees and topical
standards, Question ID 306 - Location of MDR
in the report during phase-in 750 employees,
Question ID 910 – Transitional provisions for
value chain and Scope 3 GHG
Type of employee Question ID 730 – Type of employee and
social protection
Value chain Question ID 167 - GHG protocol scope 3;
sector, Question ID 910 – Transitional
provisions for value chain and Scope 3 GHG,
Question ID 753– Financial materiality in the
value chain and power purchase agreements,
Question ID 776 – Pollutants emissions –
granularity, Question ID 676 – Water metrics
in the value chain, Question ID 882 – Data
availability for biogenic emissions in Scope 3
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 267 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Value chain metrics Question ID 776 – Pollutants emissions –
granularity, Question ID 676 – Water metrics
in the value chain
Value chain workers Question ID 434 – Difference between non-
employees and value chain workers, Question
ID 882 – Data availability for biogenic
emissions in Scope 3
Voluntary disclosure requirements Question ID 29 and 261 – ‘May’ and ‘shall’
reporting requirements
Water consumption Question ID 455 – Contextual information and
consolidated data for water consumption,
Question ID 526 and ID 1021 – Disclosure of a
non-material datapoint (water-consumption
in own operations) related to a (a) material
and (b) non-material topic, Question ID 676 –
Water metrics in the value chain
Water and soil Question ID 832 – Pollutants emissions –
changes over time, Question ID 776 –
Pollutants emissions – granularity
Water metrics Question ID 676 – Water metrics in the value
chain,
Water withdrawals Question ID 676 – Water metrics in the value
chain
Waste Question ID 238 – Whether waste
incineration is a disposal operation, Question
ID 438 – Treatment of non-material
datapoints, e.g. radioactive waste – can it be
a non-material datapoint?
Waste disposal Question ID 238 – Whether waste
incineration is a disposal operation
Waste incineration Question ID 238 – Whether waste
incineration is a disposal operation
Waste recovery Question ID 238 – Whether waste
incineration is a disposal operation
Workers in value chain Question ID 356 – Sub-contractors Scope S1,
S2, Question ID 1026 – Definition of end-users
Working conditions Question ID 376 - Definition of collective
bargaining
Work-life balance Question ID 217 - Prudential consolidation,
Question ID 341 - Conditions for paternity,
maternity, parental leave
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 268 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Work-related injuries Question ID 271 / 287– Difference between
work-related accident and work-related injury
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 269 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Appendix III: Questions categorised as ‘already answered’ and reference
to where they have been answered
Questions received and categorized as "already answered" as of: 30.11.24
Reference to
Question where question
Title Question asked ESRS reference Allocation to
ID has been
answered
Gross or net (impact) ESRS 1 chapter 3.4 IG 1 Materiality
1 Shall preparers use an inherent (gross) or residual (net) perspective? x-cutting
materiality "Impact Materiality" Assessment FAQ 23
ESRS 1 chapter 5.1
Materiality in value IG 2 Value Chain
3 Topic is not material for "own operations" but material for other segments, DR still due? Reporting undertaking x-cutting
chain only chapter 2.2
and value chain
According to paragraph 41, appropriate quantitative and/or qualitative thresholds should be used when IG 1 Materiality
Materiality
determining which impacts, risks and opportunities are identified and addressed by the undertaking as Assessment
79asssessment - ESRS 1 paragprah 41 x-cutting
material and to determine which sustainability matters are material for reporting purpose. What is seen as chapter 3.6 and
Thresholds
appropriate thresholds? 3.7
ESRS 1 chapter 7.6; IG 1
Materiality / Materiality Assessment
How to conduct the materiality assessment in groups with many subsidiaries: one consolidated materiality IG 1 Materiality
102Consolidated (update based on final x-cutting
assessment or within each subsidiary with subsequent aggregration? Assessment FAQ 13
reporting IG 1 Materiality
Assessment)
ESRS 1 chapter 3.1
Materiality Stakeholders and their IG 1 Materiality
103assessment - Are there stakeholder groups that are mandatorily to be consulted? relevance …; IG 1 x-cutting Assessment
stakeholder groups Materiality Assessment chapter 5.4
chapter 5.4
Gross or net (impact) IG 1 Materiality
117 Do we have to consider net or gross risk in the materiality assessment? materiality assessment x-cutting
materiality Assessment FAQ 23
IG 2 Value Chain
As part of the materiality analysis it is necessary to identify all material upstream activities.My question is
chapter 2.1 Should
about when it is allowed to make a cut, as some considerations would clearly exceed the scope. Example: ESRS 1 chapter 5.1
IROs linked to all
122Value chain - tier N Among other activities a logistic company uses trucks to transport the goods. This naturally results in various Reporting undertaking x-cutting
actors in the VC be
environmental effects (e.g co2-emission), but does the company now have to record the entire production of and value chain
considered?; and
the truck? This would at once make all ESRS issues material.
FAQ 1
Voluntary / Will a "may"-disclosure be mandatory to disclose, if the datapoint is material? And vice-verse can a "shall"-
133Mandatory disclosure be omitted if the datapoint is not material? The question is; what relevance has "shall" and "may" ESRS 1 paragraph 18 x-cutting ID 29
requirements after materiality assessments was included by the European Commission?
Materiality is reported on at consolidated level for a company that operates and own many different
IG 1 Materiality
group active in technologies, all within the same entity. However, a topic is deeped material due to one technology, while
134 ESRS 1 paragraph 104 x-cutting Assessment FAQ
different sectors the same topic is immaterial for another technology. Can you scope out this topic for the technology where
22
its immaterial, while report only the metrics on the technology where it is material?
IG 1 Materiality
Are there universal thresholds for impact and financial materiality? If not, how can we avoid changing the Assessment
163universal thresholds? ESRS 1 x-cutting
final list of material sustainability matters? chapters 3.6 and
3.7
ESRS 1 paragraph 45;
(Impact) materiality IG 1 Materiality
179 Does likelihood apply on the residual risk (after mitigation) or on the raw/inherent risk (before mitigation)? IG 1 Materiality x-cutting
and likelihood Assessment FAQ 23
Assessment FAQ 23
relationship of
We must achieve double materiality on matters defined as topics, sub topics or sub sub topics defined in the ESRS 2 IRO-1; IG 1 IG 1 Materiality
impacts, risks and
183 ESRS E1 to G1. To what extent can we perform materiality assessment on sub-topic and with results directly Materiality Assessment x-cutting Assessment
opportunities with
caracterize theses matters as IROs ? chapter 2.2 chapter 2.2 par 44
(sub-)/sub-topics
materiality
assessment and no IG 1 Materiality
What exactly does it mean that the materiality assessment of a negative impact is informed by the due ESRS 1 paragraph 45;
due diligence Assessment
184 diligence process? Are companies required to adopt the due diligence process of the OECD Guidelines for IG 1 Materiality x-cutting
process according to chapter 3.5 and
Multinational Enterprises when assessing double materiality? Assessment chapter 4.3
international 4.3
instruments
mandatory / IG 1 Materiality
voluntary disclosures Can it be clarified which Datapoints are really mandatory if only a subtopic is material but not the entire ESRS 2 Appendix E, S1 Assessment
207 x-cutting
when a matter is topic? almost all DR's chapter 2.2 (in
essassed material particular par 47)
JV and associates -
What share of information shall be reported from joint arrangements and associates when they are included ESRS 1, paragraph 67; IG 2 Value chain
212share of information x-cutting
in a reporting undertaking's reporting boundary and how shall this share be calculated? ESRS E1 paragraph 46 chapter 2.3
/ value chain
JV and associates -
How is materiality to be considered by a reporting undertaking when determining whether to include joint IG 2 Value chain
213share of information ESRS 1, section 5.1 x-cutting
arrangements and associates in its reporting boundary? chapter 2.3
/ value chain
2.1Does materiality assessment take precedence over ESRS 1:18? 2.2Is an undertaking required to disclose
Materiality of
a datapoint that is not material, if it is a "shall disclose" datapoint (example 1 above)? 2.3Can an
261information and ESRS 1 paragraph 18 x-cutting ID 29
undertaking disregard the disclosure of a "may disclose" datapoint, if the datapoint is material (example 2
"may-datapoints"
above)? 2.4What is the relevance of ESRS 1:18 if materiality takes precedence over ESRS 1:18?
Assessment of
severity (scale, ÊSRS 1 paragraph 45; IG 1 Materiality
275scope, irremediable How can the severity of an impact be assessed, specifically for environmental matters ? IG 1 Materiality x-cutting Assessment
character) for Assessment chapter 3.6 chapter 3.3.1
impacts
IG 1 Materiality
Materiality - at what ESRS 1 3.3 Double
When doing the materiality assessment should value chain be considered from the outset or should own Assessment
281point in time to materiality, paragraph x-cutting
operations be considered first subsequently value chain be integrated? chapter 2.6 and
consider value chain 42.
3.2;
Difference between
work-related ESRS S1-14 paragraph
287 What is the difference between an 'accident' and an 'injury', and how should I count a 'case'? Social ID 271
accident and work- 88c
related injury
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 270 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Questions received and categorized as "already answered" as of: 30.11.24
Reference to
Question where question
Title Question asked ESRS reference Allocation to
ID has been
answered
Disclosure Requirement
IRO-1 and SBM-3; ESRS
2 paragraph 49; ESRS
E1 paragraph 12; ESRS
"alongside" E2 paragraph 10; ESRS
presentation of ESRS E2 paragraph 7; ESRS
If we take the example of ESRS E1, and the information relating to the transition plan (E1-1, §14), should it
3042 related E4 paragraph 9; ESRS x-cutting ID 296
be published in ESRS E1 or in the part linked to E1 in ESRS 2 ?
information of E5 paragraph 10; ESRS
topical standards S1 paragraph 11; ESRS
S1 paragraph 8; ESRS S3
paragraph 6; ESRS S4
paragraph 7; ESRS G1
paragraph 4
Disclosure Requirement
IRO-1 and SBM-3; ESRS
2 paragraph 49; ESRS
E1 paragraph 12; ESRS
"alongside" E2 paragraph 10; ESRS
presentation of ESRS E2 paragraph 7; ESRS
If we take the example of ESRS S1, and the information requested in Appendix C of ESRS 2, should we publish
3052 related E4 paragraph 9; ESRS x-cutting ID 304 and 296
the parts related to SBM-2 and SBM-3 in ESRS 2 or in the topical ESRS?
information of E5 paragraph 10; ESRS
topical standards S1 paragraph 11; ESRS
S1 paragraph 8; ESRS S3
paragraph 6; ESRS S4
paragraph 7; ESRS G1
paragraph 4
moving from impact We are an Group of Companys in three different sectors ( logistics, retail, services). We did an simple IG 1 Materiality
IG 1 Materiality
(or financial) materialityanalysis last year and published it in our sustainability paper. How can we do a double materiality Assessment
315 Assessment chapter 4.1 x-cutting
materiality alone to and what are the exact steps to do it. Can we use the data from the simplle materiality to perform the chapter 4.1 for GRI
for GRI 4.2 for ISSB
double materiality double materiality or do we have to collect completely new data? 4.2 for ISSB
ESRS 1, IG 1 Materiality
Definition of How should we define our material topics? Should be the highest value of the IROs scored or the average of IG 1 Materiality
325 Assessment 3.6 and 3.7 x-cutting
material topics them? Assessment
Setting thresholds
XBRL - complete list Considering Appendix C of ESRS 2 and EFRAG´s list of ESRS data points excel; Why not all DRs in ESRS E1-9 are ESRS Disclosure ESRS 1, Appendix C
329 XBRL
of requirements marked as subject to phasing-in provisions (Column I)? Requirement E1-9 on E1-9
IG 1 Materiality
Materiality -
My question refers to the implementation of the materiality assessment. Does a high rating for one of the ESRS 1 General Assessment 3.6
354thresholds for x-cutting
four factors (scale, impact, irremediability, likelihood) mean that an impact must be classified as material? requirements, AR9+10 and 3.7 Setting
impact materiality
thresholds
Page (document 237-
PDF 238); Numeral 5:
When disclosing
information about the
Administrative, Could you please specify clearly about what will be included in the administrative, management and
role of the
358management and supervisory bodies? By this, I mean, it refers to only a highest body (Board of Directors) or it refers to x-cutting ID 171
administrative,
supervisory bodies another(s) bodies.
management and
supervisory bodies, the
undertaking shall cover
the following aspects".
applicability of
Appendix B (other
DMAIG Paragraph 5,
361EU legislation) Explicit statement on ESRS 2 Appendix B Datapoints even if they are not relevant to my company? x-cutting ID 335
ESRS 2 Appendix B
datapoints for all
undertakings
Precedence of How should one give precedence of severity over likelihood in the case of a potential negative human rights IG 1 Materialy
ESRS 1 Characteristics
368severity over impact if severity and likelihood are multiplied as done in risk management to determine the impact's x-cutting Assessment
of severity AR 11
likelihood in the MA materiality? chapter 3.6.2
high climate impact ESRS E1 paragraph 40
369 Is paragraph 40 only applicable for undertakings listed in NACE Sections A-H or L? Environment ID 338
sectors and AR 36
Actual and Potential ESRS 1 Chapter 6.4, ESRS Annex II -
372Impacts and time What is the exact relation between Actual and Potential Impacts, and the short-, medium- and long-term? MAIG paragraph 74 x-cutting Acronyms and
horizons and chapter 3.6 glossary of terms
When disclosing information under ESRS S1-6. Do we account for all employees? Or only significant
Total number of ESRS S1 paragraph
386 employment (head count of locations where we have a minimum of 50 employees that represent at least Social ID 365
employees 50(a)
10% of total employment)?
Components annual the computation of the annual total remuneration considers not only base salary but also takes into account
390total remuneration, other cash components and benefits. WHy are these components not included when computing the gender ESRS S1-16 Social ID 132
gender pay gap pay gap?
Sub-consultants
396 Are sub-consultants included in own workforce, or are they to be included within the S2-disclosures? S1-7 Social ID 356
Scope S1, S2
Substances of (very Would there be available of the list of actual SOC with their CAS numbers? What will be the concentration
398 ESRS E2-5 Environment ID 186, 301
high) concern limit of those substances in the mixture?
35(a)v. Consumption from nuclear products: Does this also imply purchased electrcitiy from the grid that has
Energy consumption
469 been generated via nuclear production or only % of nuclear products directly purchased by the reporting ESRS E1 paragraph 35 Environment ID 36
from nuclear sources
company?
Specification of We do not understand what we are suppose to answer here, which ESRS DR are we supposed to specify
ESRS 2 ´, SBM-3,
470impacts, risks and impacts, risks and opportuninties for in this datapoint and what does the standard mean with "opposed to x-cutting ID 67
paragraph 48h
opportunities those covered by additional entity-specific disclosure"? What entity-specific disclosure?
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 271 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Questions received and categorized as "already answered" as of: 30.11.24
Reference to
Question where question
Title Question asked ESRS reference Allocation to
ID has been
answered
Mandatory
disclosure Is it correct that apart from all disclosures in ESRS 2, no other disclosures, requirements or data points are
476 ESRS 1 Appendix E x-cutting ID 29
requirements obligatory and everything can be omitted if found to be not material even if a topic is material?
outside ESRS 2
i am trying to understand whether my subsidiaries located outsite of Europe are eligible to the CSRD. The
scope of
parent company is headquartered in Germany and satisfies all 3 criterias, and subsidiaries are located in
480consolidation - non- ESRS 1 paragraph 62 x-cutting ID 148
Hong-kong, China and South Korea. Do we need to collect their information and consolidate them or they
EU subsidiaries
are out of scope ?
IG 1 Materiality
Assessment
ESRS 2 related paragraph 4; ESRS
Are all general requirements as specified in ESRS2 obligatory disclosure (see ESRS 1.29) or only IRO-1 ESRS 1.29 (in conjuction
Disclosure 1 paragraph 29;
495 requirements (see ESRS 2.2). Do IRO-2 and SBM-3 also set disclosure requirements for the materiality with ESRS 1.30 and x-cutting
Requirements in ESRS 2 paragraph
assessment? ESRS 2.2)
topical standards 2 (a) "in all
instances" and (b)
"only … if"
Materiality
assessment of IG 1 Materiality
Does a compancy within its materality assessment process have to evaluate each sub topics individually in
498sustainability ESRS 1-27 x-cutting Assessment
the list provided in AR 16 as must?
matters / chapter 2.2
approaches & AR16
Materiality
Does the materiality assessment take into account company-specific policies and measures in determining IG 1 Materiality
503assessment; entity- ESRS 1 x-cutting
whether an issue is material? Assessment
specific policies
Use of male/female
In the tabular formats presented under S1-6 AR55, terms "Male", "Female" and "Other" are used. Is it S1-6 Application
505and gender-related Social ID 430
allowed to change the terms to more diversity-friendly and inclusive language? Requirement 55
terminology
Scope of Shall an EU entity (i.E. EU-based listed holding company) that falls under the scope of the CSRD reporting
506consolidation - non- obligation, and which has a non-EU subsidiary (a credit institution), include in its consolidated report ESRS ESRS 1 7.6 x-cutting ID 148
EU subsidiary data points/KPIs of that Non-EU subsidiary (credit institution)?
IG 1 Materiality
Assessment FAQ
ESRS 1 paragraph 26;
inherent or residual 23;
Material matters and
515risks; before or after When scoring impacts, should we consider residual risk or inherent risk? x-cutting
materiality of
mitigation activities see also ID 790 on
information
financial
materiality; ID 791
Given: a EU daughter company that meets the reporting requirements that belongs to a larger EU group
Materiality IG 1 Materiality
which consolidates reporting on group level. Question: is the daughter company obliged to run their own
539Assessment - level of ESRS 1 3.7 x-cutting Assessment
specific DMA analysis? Or, can the DMA (and final reporting) be organised on group level in which the
disaggregation chapter 3.6.3
daughter is integrated?
MAIG - assessment
Regarding the materiality assessment. Is it mandatory for a company to assess the level of materiality of the ESRS 1 General IG 1 Materiality
of materiality at the
544 IROs of each material topic, or can a company assess the level of materiality directly of the material topic requirements; ch 1.1; x-cutting Assessment
level of Matter
itself? parag. 2 chapter 2.2
rather than IRO
ESRS 1 General
MAIG - IRO
Requirements; ch 3.4 IG 1 Materiality
assessment of Can the topics (or IROs) be assessed for their significance or is it mandatory to assess the components of
545 and 3.5 (Impact x-cutting Assessment
severity & likelihood severity and likelihood (impact materiality) and potential magnitude and likelihood (financial materiality)?
materiality and chapter 3.3
mandatory?
financial materiality)
MAIG - Def of
When ESRS document mentions 'sustainability matters', does it mean topics, sub-topics or sub sub topics IG 1 Materiality
sustainability ESRS S1 - Materiality
566 (e.g., own workforce/ Working conditions/ Secure employment)? Which level of topics (level 1, 2 or 3) should x-cutting Assessment section
matters (and links to assessment
be considered to conduct the materiality assessment? 2.2
topics or sub-topics)
Materiality
assessment - order IG 1 Materiality
For enterprises working on their financial stakeholder materiality, wouldn't it be more intuitive to assess in Cross-cutting standards
571of addressing x-cutting Assessment
order; business objectives, opportunities, risks and impacts, respectively ? and governance issues
impacts, risk and chapter 2.1
opportunities
IG 1 Materiality
Double materiality For the DMA, does priorities are only on matters that have both impact materiality and a financial Assessment
586 ESRS x-cutting
assessment materiality, or can it be a priority if only one materiality ? paragraphs 36 to
38
own operation;
When performing a demolition of a building for a client, the reporting undertaking is "waste producer" by
595waste - demolition of ESRS E5-5 paragraph 37Environment ID 496
law. Do these waste amounts have to be reportet even though the are not generated in own operations?
buildings
Materiality IG 1 Materiality
What kind of scales can an undertaking use for evaluating scale and scope of an (potential) impact, and how
613assessment - scale ESRS 1 paragraph 45 x-cutting Assessment
would an undertaking evaluate its impacts?
and scope chapter 3.6
Fossil fuel sector, Should an Engineering, Procurement and Construction contractor of an LNG plant include its EPC revenues ESRS 2 paragraph 40 d
645 x-cutting ID 644
scope under this caption? (i)
MDR on policies, also The paragraph containing the reference to MDR-P is missing for G1-1 wherefore it is not clear if companies
657 ESRS G1-1 §7-§10 Governance ID 479
for ESRS G1 have to disclose the MDR-P requirements for G1 or not.
Policies on material
658 Concerning G1-1: Does the company have to prepare policies for all material topics? ESRS G1-1 §7 Governance ID 479
Governance topics
Governance;
minimum disclosure
ESRS 2 MDR-A § 66
659requirements for Is it mandatory to disclose actions and targets for G1? Governance ID 479
ESRS 2 MDR-T § 80
policies, actions and
targets
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 272 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Questions received and categorized as "already answered" as of: 30.11.24
Reference to
Question where question
Title Question asked ESRS reference Allocation to
ID has been
answered
scope of
consolidation -
When reporting metrics - is ESRS1 para 62 ("The sustainability statement shall be for the same reporting
timing of
677 undertaking as the financial statements") always applicable? Are there any exemptions or transitional ESRS1 paragraph 62 x-cutting ID 504
acquisitions,
provisions applicable?
divestment of
subsidiaries
For each "basis of preparation" described in the standard ESRS 2, should all the disclosures concerned by the ESRS 2 paragraph
683Basis of preparation ESRS 2 BP-2 x-cutting
standard be listed in the ESRS 2 paragraph at the beginning of the report? 8
scope of
Which countries are to be included in the reporting? If the holding company is based in Germany, are all
consolidation - non
684 subsidiaries worldwide to be included or only those based in Europe? Should subsidiaries in the UK be ESRS S1 x-cutting ID 148
EU - unconsolidated
included?
subsidiaries
Why are not all datapoints as well as application requirements included in the excel draft list of esrs data
XBRL - complete list
697 points? Some points are missing ( ESRS 1 E1-1 DP15) ? Also, many application requirements are not included ESRS 1 E1-1 DP15 XBRL ID 326
of requirements
in the list. Why is this the case?
We understand that the exercise of assessment of the materiality of a topic results in determining a level of
risk and a level of opportunity for the financial materiality on one side, and a level of negative impact and a
Risk vs opportunity level of positive impact for the impact materiality on the other side. However, we are wondering how to IG 1 Materiality
/ properly give a sense of risk vs opportunity and positive vs negative impact? Assessment
706 ESRS 1 Chapter 2.2 x-cutting
positive vs negative Question rephrased to: Where to set thresholds for risks and opportunities respectively positive and negative chapter 3.6 and
impact, thresholds impacts? For instance, if a topic has a high level of opportunity, and a low level of risk, where should we place 3.7
it on our matrix for the reader to be able to know whether the level of financial materiality is driven by the
risk or by the opportunity of this specific topic?
Are datapoints from ESRS 2, Appendix B (List of datapoints in cross-cutting and topical standards that derive
Datapoints derived from other EU legislation) always mandatory and if not, how can this be compatible with the CSRD IG 1 Materiality
717from EU legislation (2022/2644, Article 1 - Amendments to Directive 2013/34/EU, paragraph 8, no. 1, subparagraph 2: "which ESRS 1 paragraph 35 x-cutting Assessment
and materiality shall at least include the information that financial market participants subject to the disclosure obligations chapter 2.5
of Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 need in order to comply with those obligations")?
ESRS 1 General ESRS 1 paragraph
Always material If a topic is mandatory to report on (such as E1 climate change), can the materiality assessment for the IROs Requirements 32; IG1 Materiality
721 x-cutting
topics? belonging to this topic be omitted and the IROs will become material automatically? paragraph 25, 27, 42, Assessment
45, 46 paragraph 31
ESRS S1.93, ESRS S1.94,
Conditions Family- Which conditions must be met to affirm 'entitlement to family-related leave' when reporting in accordance
726 ESRS S1.AR96, ESRS Social ID 340
related Leave with ESRS S1-15?
S1.AR97
What is the correct approach to stakeholder engagement?
Detailed questions provided in background:
1) When is the right time to engage stakeholders into the dialogue? Is it correct approach to engage
stakeholders only in the last step of Double Materiality Assessment, for validation of identified material
topics, sub-topics etc.? 2) Would it be correct to engage them in the form of questionnaire with a scale to
IG 1 Materiality
score materiality of each topic? Is it sufficient to explain the reason why this topic was deemed material and
stakeholder Assessment
729 not to include the exhausting list of IROs? 3) Should stakeholders consider what is material to them or ESRS E1, paragraph 3.1 x-cutting
engagement chapter 3.5, FAQ 1
consider what is material to the reporting entity in their view? 4) Is it correct to assign different weights to
and chapter 5.4
different stakeholder types when evaluating the results of stakeholder dialogue? Could these weights be
decided solely by internal managerial decision of the reporting entity? 5) Is it correct approach to choose a
sample of people from each stakeholder category a engage them in the dialogue? E.g. if the reporting entity
has 1,000 employees, it will choose a sample of employees from each functional department and engage
only 20 employees.
ESRS 1 paragraph
I wonder why the ESRS 1 group policies and actions (§12 c ii) together, separated from metrics and targets 33 and 24; IG 1
Relationship of
(§12 d), while the "Flowchart for determining disclosures under ESRS" in Appendix E is referring to policies, ESRS 1, § 12c ii and 12d Materiality
737policies, actions, and x-cutting
actions and targets as one "group", while metrics is considered alone? Are targets related to both these and Appendix E Assessment
targets to metrics
"groups"? paragraph 55 and
56
ESRS E1 DR E1-5
740High Climate sectorsWhat are the "high climate impact sectors" referred to in ESRS E1 DR E1-5 paragraph 38? Environment ID 338
paragraph 38
Calculation of
gender pay gap - Are we obliged to disclose one gender pay gap per each country or disclose one group gender pay gap for all
ESRS Disclosure
747consolidation, employees in our 40 countries where we have operations (with a vast variety of pay levels depending on Social ID 388
Requirements S1-16
disaggregation by factors such as purchase power, cost-of-living, tax systems, social security systems etc)?
country
IG 1 Materiality
Reporting only part Assessment
757 Would it be possible to report only part of the metrics of a material ESRS ? ESRS 1 part 3.2 x-cutting
of metrics chapter 2.4 para
56
non-listed companies ESRS 1 chapter 8
786and management Do private companies still publish the sustainability statement separately to the financial statements? N/A Other (para 110) and
report CSRD
IG 2 Value Chain
see also 792 and
sustainability rules
787 Are there precise criterias on how companies should consolidate? Is it financial or operational consolidation?ESRS chapter 5.1 x-cutting ID 284 for social
for consolidation?
and ID 1000, 1083,
1084 for
environment
IG 2 Value Chain
FAQ 1 and also FAQ
ESRS 1 General
7
788Value chain - tier N How far from the company should we go when analysing affected stakeholders from the DMA perspective? requirements 3./3.1./ x-cutting
22. (a)
similar question ID
122
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 273 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Questions received and categorized as "already answered" as of: 30.11.24
Reference to
Question where question
Title Question asked ESRS reference Allocation to
ID has been
answered
Financial year
E-PRTR requires reporting on calendar year basis. If a company has a different fiscal year (e.g. 1.10-30.9.) ESRS E2-4 paragraphs
805different vs calendar Environment ID 286
can the E-PRTR data still be disclosed on calendar year basis? 28 & AR 24
year - metrics
qualitative vs
quantitative
Regarding financial effects in monetary terms, is it only mandatory to report that in the E and not the S and
810disclosures for DR ESRS S1 AR9 x-cutting ID 141
G?
SBM 3 financial
effects
ESRS 2 par.53;ESRS 2 IG 1 Materiality
IRO prioritising for par.53 (b) iv; ESRS 2 Assessment
813 Can/should IROs be prioritised for reporting purposes? x-cutting
reporting purposes par.53(c) iii; IG 1 par. chapter 2
26 (paragraph 26)
Phase-in 750
Can Minimum Disclosure Requirements (and the related data points) be subject to phase-in provisions for
employees; ESRS 2
820 the sustainability matters that have been assessed as material according to the undertaking's materiality ESRS 1 Appendix C x-cutting ID 58
related disclosures in
assessment?
topical standards
Mapping
sustainability Will official EFRAG mapping tables (in Excel or another format) be provided to link the data points to the ID 177, 846, 859
828 ESRS 1 para AR 16. x-cutting
matters to disclosure respective topics and sub-topics? [Draft IG 4]
requirements
When performing the DMA for a holding company, should a topic, considered only material for subsidiary A
holding and topic be considered material at the holding level? At the end, should it be reported for all the other subsidiaries?
ESRS 1 paras IG 1 Materiality
830only material for Or due to weighting reasons it could be disregarded (if subsidiary A does not represent much neither in x-cutting
67,68,69,70 Assessment FAQ 22
subsidary terms of impact nor financially)? Also, should we consider holding-level specific topics (e.g. holding company
employee matters)??
What does "annual % target/base year" concretely mean in the table to disclose GHG emissions and the
834Reduction target ESRS-E1 AR 48 Environment ID 414
company's related targets disaggregated by Scope 1, and 2 and significant Scope 3?
Why are not all paragraphs of the ESRS E1 full text that indicate a disclosure requirement by 'the
undertaking shall...' included in the 'Draft EFRAG IG 3 List of ESRS Data Points 231222.xlsx'? If a company
XBRL - complete list ESRS E1 AR 46 and AR
838 checks all relevant (i.e. material and applicable) rows in the list of ESRS data points, can it be sure that it is XBRL ID 326 and 697
of requirements 51
compliant with the respective ESRS or still need to check the whole full text incl. ARs if something needs to
be disclosed in addition?
Mapping ESRS2-IRO-2-§56 requires the company to publish the list of DRs derived from its materiality analysis, which
sustainability will greatly help the auditor's work. However, the list of topics to be analysed first (ESRS 1 - AR16) does not ESRS2 - IRO-2 - 56; ID 177, 828, 859
846 x-cutting
matters to disclosure exactly follow the list of DRs in each standard. Furthermore, what should be done when a company has not ESRS2 - AR19 [Draft IG 4]
requirements used the AR16 list but a list of specific issues, which it has then translated into transversal ESRSs?
ESRS paragraph 17 The explanatory note of the data points says that 134 of the 141 data points in ESRS 2 (excluding the 12 dp
IG 3 List of ESRS
850datapoints (phase-in that are voluntary) have to be reported irrespective of the materiality assessment. So which are the 7 dp ESRS data points x-cutting
Data Points
< 750 employees) that are excluded?
Mapping
sustainability If I've identified two sub-topics related to climate change (i.e. climate change mitigation and energy) as ID 177, 828, 846
859 ESRS 1 x-cutting
matters to disclosure material which are the datapoints that I must disclose? [Draft IG 4]
requirements
In the VC coverage map it is indicated, under item 4, that: "The undertaking shall reflect whether and how
policies, actions or targets cover VC." One of the items mentioned here is S1-1 to S1-5. It is unclear to me VCIG, chapter 4, VC IG 2 Value Chain
869VCIG Coverage Map Social
why these DR's would refer to VC, as S1 typically applies to "own workforce". S1-1 to S1-17 is also mentioned map, paragraph 155 paragraph 184
under item 6. This seems to create a level of overlap with respect to S1-1 to S1-5 that I cannot follow.
Mapping
sustainability Doubt on how to determine which DRs have to be applied when any topic, subtopic or sub-sub-topic had
880 ERSR 1 AR 16 x-cutting ID 177
matters to disclosure been assesed as a sustainbility matters by a materiality assesment
requirements
ESRS S1-6, paragraph 50 a states that the undertaking shall disclose the total number of employees by head
ESRS S1-6 paragraph 50
884Head count, FTE count, and breakdowns by gender and by country. Why must the total number of employees be reported by Social ID 32
a
head count instead of giving the option of choosing between head count and FTE?
Disclosure
ESRS 1 paragraph 33 discusses what needs to be disclosed if companies do not have policies, actions, and/or
requirements on
targets. What do companies need to do if they do not have information available on material ESRS metrics,
887material metrics ESRS 1 paragraph 33 x-cutting ID 504
on disclosure requirements related to strategy (e.g. ESRS E4-1), and on disclosure requirements related to
when information is
impacts, risks and opportunities management (e.g. ESRS S1-2 and S1-3)?
not available
data not How acceptable would be a reporting practice to include statements like "we do not calculate/do not obtain
calculated/available - the information" for certain disclosures. This does not concern specific cases on not-material subtopics or E5-5 paragraph 36 or
888 x-cutting ID 504
what to report, disclosures which explicitly require company to say "we dot have it" and "when we will have it" (like for paragraph 37c
enforceability example, E1-1 Art17 on climate transition plan).
Entitlement family- When is a person considered as entitled for Family Related Leave and considered to have taken family ESRS Disclosure
894 Social ID 340
related leave related leave? Requirement S1-15.93
Question is around applying ESRS 2 in the topical standards ESG. ESRS 2 is describing the disclosure
ESRS 2 related
requirements of the reporting areas GOV, SBM and IRO. These reporting areas are again to be reported in
Disclosure ESRS 2 - GOV1-5, SBM 1-
920 the topical specific standards. The question is whether it is required to report the "general", overall x-cutting ID 296
Requirements in 3, IRO1-2
company related reporting areas in ESRS 2 OR apply the disclosure requirements defined in ESRS 2 when
topical standards
reporting the specific disclosure requirements in the topical standards.
926Formula What is the formula to estimate last column of the AR48 table regarding Annual % Target / base year? ESRS E1-6 AR48 Environment ID 414
IRO-1 related
disclosures in topical When reporting against the ESRS topic standards E1-E5, is it mandatory to report against the IRO-1 ESRS 1 paragraph
934 ESRS 2, para 2, a and b x-cutting
standards; always to disclosure requirements under each of those ESRS' regardless if they are material or not? 29
be reported?
Approximation of
Should the numbers for water intensity and volumes be rounded (and if so, to up/down or closest) or does it
963metrics on water ESRS E3-4 para. 28-29 Environment ID 952
need to have decimal places?
consumption
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 274 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Questions received and categorized as "already answered" as of: 30.11.24
Reference to
Question where question
Title Question asked ESRS reference Allocation to
ID has been
answered
Breakdown by Should the breakdown by gender be all genders that a company may have registered, or should it be limited
973 S1-15 Social ID 430
gender to the genders in S1-6 MALE/FEMALE/OTHER/NOT SPECIFIED?
Remediation and IG 1 Materiality
985 Should impacts be assessed and disclosed pre or post mitigation? All x-cutting
mitigation Assessment FAQ 23
IG 1 Materiality
Assessment - FAQ
inherent or residual
ERS1 chap 3 double 23 ; see also ID 515
1004risks; before or after for double materiality, please clarify gross and net ? analyse or evaluation ? x-cutting
materiality on impact
mitigation activities
materiality; ID 790
+ 791
are MDR a minimum IG 1 Materiality
for PATM or is the In ESRS 2, there is a description of the MDR for policies, measures, and actions. I would like to know if this Assessment FAQ 21
1017content in topical MDR ensures compliance and eliminates the need to fulfill the reporting requirement in other ESRS in that ESRS 2 (MDR) x-cutting (paragraph 220)
ESRS also to be respect? and ESRS 1
disclosed paragraph 33
1024 0Is it mandatory to do a climate scenario analysis? SBM3, IRO 1, E1-9 Environment ID 245
different between
IG 1 Materiality
IROs at group and If there are significant changes between material IRO at group and subsidiary level, do the report only have
1027 Esrs 1 paragraph 103 XBRL Assessment para
subsidiary level and to report on the differences in IRO, and thereby not report policys, metrics etc?
227
disclosures required
transisitonal
IG 2 Value Chain
provisions value How does the writing about rransitional provision related to chapter 5 Value chain relate to the phase ins in
1032 ESRS 1, 10.2 x-cutting chapter 2.7 / ID
chain; scope 3 GHG appendix C?
910
emissions
FAQ 2 of the IG 2
As part of the CSRD, we would like to know whether we need to take into account the investments we
Financial assets to be value chain
1044 make. If we have to take them into account, we would also like to know how and if all our investments are ESRS 2 x-cutting
considered? implementation
affected (selection criteria?)
guide
What is the proper quantification of the number of days lost due to a fatality from one work-related accident ESRS S1-14 paragraph
1045Days lost to fatality Social ID 351
or ill health case? 88(e)
non-material
If we have not identified a material impact, risk or opportunity related to a disclosure requirement, so it is
datapoints
not material, but we would nevertheless like to disclose information on this disclosure requirement to satisfy ID 526 as well as
1046requested to be in ESRS 1 x-cutting
other information requirement (e.g. investors, rating agencies), are we able to disclose if highlighted as not ID 1021, 1048
sustainability
related to a material topic? Where would this be best placed in the CSRD report?
statement
ESRS 1 paragraph 31 IG 1 Materiality
Materiality of
Is the materiality assessment of information, as envisaged by ESRS 1 paragraph 31, applicable to datapoints Disclosure Assessment
1077information x-cutting
on Policies, Actions and Targets? requirements S1-1; S1- chapter 2.4
applicable to PAT?
2; S1-3; S1-4; S1-5 (paragraph 56)
IG 2 Value Chain
Value chain - The undertaking is an advertising agency and part of very different value chains, because it works for clients
1088 ESRS 1 3.3 39 x-cutting chapter 2.1 What
marketing from different sectors. Does it have to take this into account when evaluating material impacts?
is the VC?
IG 1 Materiality
Assessment
Group vs subsidiary If a subsidiary is significantly larger and trumps the parent company (who reports under CSRD) in every
1099 ESRS 1 chapter 7.6 x-cutting chapter 3.6.3 and
materiality aspect, how should we approach this at the group level?
FAQ 13 (and ESRS 1
para 102)
Pollutants emissions - My company is not in scope of EPTR (criteria of Annex I are not applicable). Do I still need to report on ESRS E2-4 paragraph
1102 Environment ID 1005
E-PRTR pollutants listed in Annex II? 28(a)
IG 1 Materiality
Relationship of sub-
1106 In the double materiality, what happens if a sub-sub topic is material do you disclose all the topic? ESRS E2 DMA x-cutting Assessment
(sub-) topics and DR
chapter 2.2 par 44
disposal / recovery;
ID 436 (reuse) ID
allocation to Which disposal / recovery operations from EU Directive 2008/98/EC on waste annex I & II relate to which
1111 ESRS E5 paragraph 37 Environment 283 (incineration);
categories based on disposal / recovery types required by ESRS E5-5 37?
WFD Annex I and II
How shall employees who took ony type of family related leave should be counted in, if they are not entitled
1112Family-related leave ESRS S1 paragraph 93 Social ID 340
for all three types of family related leave?
1113 0Does ESRS E1 IRO-1 require organizations to conduct a climate scenario analysis? ESRS E1 IRO-1 Environment ID 245
If companies set emission reduction targets, does the target year need to be 2030 in any case or are other
1125Target year ESRS E1-4 Environment ID 531
target years applicable, too (e.g. 2032 as near-term target year)?
Mapping Ma question concerne
Je sais qu'il y a plus de 1000 indicateurs concernant tous les ESRS, mais je ne trouve pas de source fiable pour
sustainability l'ensemble des ESRS
1128 que nous puissions commencer à travailler dessus. Ma question est la suivante : où puis-je trouver tous les x-cutting ID 177
matters to disclosure (European Sustainability
indicateurs par sous-thèmes des ESRS ?
requirements Reporting Standards)
Is it allowed to have a gender breakdown of men-women-other, or is only men-women breakdown ESRS 2 GOV-1
1146Definition of Gender accepted? In case our internal HR system works with M/F/X, how do we translate this then into a M/F paragraph 21a, ESRS S1-x-cutting ID 430
breakdown for reporting? 6 paragraph 50a/b, ...
How can the difference between S2 and S4 be defined for a B2B company? (e.g are the employees of the
Definition of end-
1147 client part of the workers in the VC or the consumer/end user of a product, in case they use the product in ESRS S4/ESRS S2 (full) Social ID 1026
user
their job)? How are these situations commonly treated?
Mapping
sustainability Can you please help us understand which Data Points(DPs) are suitable for sustainability matters (AR 16),
1149 ESRS S3 Social ID 177
matters to disclosure mentioned below;
requirements
Mapping
sustainability Can you please help us understand which Data Points(DPs) are suitable for sustainability matters (AR 16),
1151 ESRS S4 Social ID 177
matters to disclosure mentioned below;
requirements
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 275 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Questions received and categorized as "already answered" as of: 30.11.24
Reference to
Question where question
Title Question asked ESRS reference Allocation to
ID has been
answered
Mapping
sustainability Can you please help us understand which Data Points(DPs) are suitable for sustainability matters (AR 16),
1152 ESRS E2 Environment ID 177
matters to disclosure mentioned below;
requirements
Definition of Disclosure requirement E5-4 talks about biological materials. However, this term is not further defined. ESRS E5 Disclosure
1163 Environment ID 242, 642
biological material What is the definition of biological materials? Requirement E5-4
contracual What is the correct formula to calculate the share of contractual instruments used for the sale and purchase
1164 ESRS E1-6, AR 45d) Environment ID 831
instruments of energy bundled with attributes about the energy generation or for unbundled energy attribute claims?
Governance;
minimum disclosure ESRS Disclosure
1168requirements for As this question relates to the description of a policy, why is there no reference to MDR-P? Requirement G1-2 Governance ID 479
policies, actions and paragraph 14
targets
Are entities expected to apply the 'precautionary principle' in their assessment of impact materiality? There
Impact materiality is no direct mention of the precautionary principle within any of the ESRS or EFRAG Guidance, however this IG 1 Materiality
1177and "precautionary principle has often been applied in other EU environmental regulation. Additionally, Para. 45 indicates that ESRS 1: Para. 43 & 45 x-cutting Assessment
principle" for human rights related impacts, the severity of the potential impact takes precedence over the likelihood, chapter 2 and 3.6
which suggests an adoption of the precautionary approach.
Value chain -
IG 2 Value Chain
separating non- Pressure of software companies value chain on earth resources (through IT equipment & data centers
1183 ESRS E1-E5 x-cutting chapter 2.1, 2.4
material from providers)
and FAQ 1
material VC IROs
Definition Non- ESRS S1 paragraph 4;
1199 who are the " non-employees " people with contracts with the undertaking to supply labour ? Social ID 33
Employees (page 166/284)
Appendix A, Table 2
"Business
IG 2 Value Chain
Business partner - Relationships" and
1218 What is the definition of business partner ? x-cutting chapter 2.1 What
defintion Implementation
is the VC? Para 26
Guidance (IG2),
paragraph 26
Application
Requirements for ESRS
We contact you with regards to Implementation Guidance 3 – List of ESRS Data Points ("IG 3") published by 2, ESRS E1, ESRS E2;
XBRL - complete list EFRAG. Our review of the IG 3 pointed to some ARs included in the ESRS Delegated Act, however missing ESRS E3, ESRS E4, ESRS
1232 XBRL ID 326
of requirements from the IG 3. We would appreciate your clarification on the reason why the ARs indicated above from the E5, ESRS S1, ESRS S2,
ESRS Delegated Act are not included in the IG 3? Many thanks for your consideration. ESRS S3, ESRS S4, ESRS
G1 as specified in #2.4
below.
ESRS 1 GENERAL
A parent undertaking has to prepare the consolidated sustainability statement(SS)under ESRS in 2024.In the REQUIREMENTS, 10.3
same year(2024)a subsidiary undertaking(SU)is exempted in accordance to art19a(8)-29a(8) of Dir Transitional provision
data for previous
1247 2013/34.In the following year(2025)or after,this SU decides to apply ESRS not using the exemption provided related to section 7.1 x-cutting ID 552
years - phase in
for in Dir2013/34.Therefore,if this SU prepares the SS under ESRS,is it allowed not to disclose comparative Presenting comparative
information according with Sec7.1 in its first year of preparation(2025 or after)? information, paragraph
136
non-material
datapoints If a specific non-financial indicator, such as workforce nutrition or SOx/NOx emissions, is not identified as
1260requested to be in material through the materiality assessment process (e.g., DMA), is the undertaking still permitted to ESRS 1 paragraph 39 x-cutting ID 1021 (and 526)
sustainability disclose this information in their sustainability statements?
statement
JV and associates - ESRS 1 paragraph 62; IG 2 Value Chain
To what extend should joint ventures, associates or joint operations be taken into account when determining
1273share of information ESRS 1 paragraph 102; x-cutting chapter 2.1 What
the impacts, risks and opportunities?
/ value chain ESRS 1 paragraph 67 is the VC?
ESRS 1 paragraph 62;
JV and associates - IG 2 Value Chain
To what extend should joint ventures, associates and joint operations be taken into account for topical ESRS 1 paragraph 102;
1274share of information x-cutting chapter 2.1 What
standards in ESRS E, ESRS S and ESRS G? ESRS 1 paragraph 67;
/ value chain is the VC?
ESRS E1 paragraph 50;
ESRS 1 paragraph 62;
Sustainability
If a subsidiary is part of the parent company for < 50%, but is under operational control of the parent ESRS 1 pa; ESRS 1
1275reporting rules for x-cutting IG 2 Value Chain
company, should this subsidiary deliver information for ESRS G1? If yes, proportionally? paragraph 67; ESRS E1
consolidation
paragraph 50; ESRS G
If an undertaking's subsidiary consolidated in its financial statement operates in different sector than
scope of
primary business and accounts for less than 10% of revenue – is it possible to conclude that this subsidiary is
consolidation - non ESRS 2 par. 40, ESRS 2
1281 not material (does not relate with any material impacts) without firstly conducting a double materiality x-cutting ID 148
EU - unconsolidated AR13
assessment? If yes, does it mean that this subsidiary can be excluded from the scope of sustainability
subsidiaries
statement, or only from disclosures regarding undertaking's strategy?
Definition non- When an employee of a contracted company (leasing of workforce), are delivering services mostly in the
1282employees, value workplace of the undertaking, should they be presented in the sustainability statement under CSRD as a ESRS S1 par. 1 Social ID 434
chain workers undertaking's own workforce (ESRS S1), or as its value chain worker (ESRS S2)?
IG 1 Materiality
IRO-1 related Irrespective of the outcome of the materiality assessment, understandings [sic] must report on ESRS 2 IRO-1 assessment
disclosures in topical datapoints including in the topical standards that are not deemed material. In practical terms how should chapter 2.3 and
1285 ESRS 1 paragraph 29 x-cutting
standards; level of undertakings address these requirements? All early CSRD reporters do not go into the level of detail of E4 2.4
detail? para 19 if not a material topic as an example so what is the expectation under limited assurance? (see explicitly
paragraph 59)
scope of
consolidation - How does the timing of an M&A transaction during a reporting year impact scoping and reporting in the
timing of buyer's CSRD report? (Refer to 2.4. for further details). For example, if an acquisition occurs during a
1290 ESRS 1 paragraph 7.6 x-cutting ID 166 (and 939)
acquisitions, reporting period, is there a grace period/transition period before the acquirer's reporting obligation is
divestment of required to take into account the acquisition (i.e. the combined group structure)?
subsidiaries
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 276 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
Questions received and categorized as "already answered" as of: 30.11.24
Reference to
Question where question
Title Question asked ESRS reference Allocation to
ID has been
answered
GHG emissions
1292 GHG Emissions factor E1-3_03 Environment ID 698
factors
XBRL Taxonomy -
Explanatory Note
XBRL taxonomy - IG3
1307 Could you explain how to answer to a DP when it is then broken down into sub-datapoints S4-1_02 // S4-2_01 // XBRL and Basis for
-sub-datapoints
Conclusions:
chapter 9.5.
Explanatory Note
and Basis for
XBRL taxonomy - IG3- Conclusions for the
1308 ESRS S4 §18 is not called by a DP. In which DP shall it be answered ? ESRS S4 §18 XBRL
full DR reference ESRS Set 1 XBRL
Taxonomy in
chapter 9.5.
Phase-in 750
employees
Are the phased-in disclosure requirements applicable, if a company has a headcount of more then 750
1320calculation: average ESRS 1 Appendix C x-cutting ID 1144
people, but they are equivalent to less than 750 full-time employees? ?
number of
employees
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 277 of 278ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – November 2024
EFRAG is funded by the European Union through the Single Market
Programme in which the EEA-EFTA countries (Norway, Iceland and
Liechtenstein), as well as Kosovo participate. Any views and opinions
expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not
necessarily reflect those of the European Union, the European
Commission or of countries that participate in the Single Market
Programme. Neither the European Union, the European Commission
nor countries participating in the Single market Programme can be held
responsible for them.
© 2024 EFRAG All rights reserved. Reproduction and use rights are strictly
limited. For further details please contact efragsecretariat@efrag.org.
Compilation of Explanations January—November 2024 Page 278 of 278Disclaimer
This Compilation of Explanations by EFRAG provides non-authoritative and accompanies the
European Sustainability Reporting Standards (ESRS), as stipulated in Article 19a and 29a of
Directive 2013/34/EU (the Accounting Directive). This means that if anything in this guidance
appears to contradict any requirement or explanation in ESRS, ESRS take precedence. This
Compilation of Explanations is issued following EFRAG’s due process for such non-authoritative
documents and under the sole responsibility of EFRAG.
EFRAG assumes no responsibility or liability whatsoever for the content or any consequences
or damages directly, indirectly or incidentally arising from following the advice or guidance
contained in this document. Users of this document are advised to exercise their own judgment
in applying ESRS. Information contained in this document should not be substituted for the
services of an appropriately qualified professional.
This Compilation of Explanations has been developed for use by large listed and unlisted
companies that are subject to ESRS. It is therefore not intended for use by non-listed small- and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), which may use the upcoming Voluntary SME standard.
This Compilation of Explanations relates to the sector agnostic ESRS as adopted by the
European Commission on 31 July 2023. Sector-specific standards may add sector specifications
to be followed by specific sectors.
The content of each Explanation has been drafted to provide an answer to a specific technical
question and cannot be directly extended by analogy to a different fact pattern.
About EFRAG
EFRAG’s mission is to serve the European public interest in both financial and sustainability
reporting by developing and promoting European views in the field of corporate reporting.
EFRAG builds on and contributes to progress in corporate reporting. In its sustainability
reporting activities, EFRAG provides technical advice to the European Commission in the form
of draft European Sustainability Reporting Standards (ESRS) elaborated under a robust due
process and supports the effective implementation of ESRS. EFRAG seeks input from all
stakeholders and obtains evidence about specific European circumstances throughout the
standard-setting process. Its legitimacy is built on excellence, transparency, governance, due
process, public accountability and thought leadership. This enables EFRAG to speak
convincingly, clearly, and consistently, and be recognised as the European voice in corporate
reporting and a contributor to global progress in corporate reporting.
EFRAG is funded by the European Union through the Single Market Programme in which the
EEA-EFTA countries (Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein), as well as Kosovo participate. Any
views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily
reflect those of the European Union, the European Commission or of countries that participate
in the Single Market Programme. Neither the European Union, the European Commission nor
countries participating in the Single market Programme can be held responsible for them.
© 2024 EFRAG All rights reserved. Reproduction and use rights are strictly limited. For further
details please contact efragsecretariat@efrag.orgESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Table of content
Introduction ............................................................................................................... 7
Questions related to ESRS General requirements and general disclosures .................... 8
ESRS 1 General requirements ................................................................................................. 8
ESRS 1 chapter 1 Categories of ESRS standards, reporting areas, and drafting conventions ................ 8
Question ID 29 and ID 261 – ‘May’ and ‘shall’ reporting requirements .............................................. 8
Question ID 106 - Entity-specific guidance and examples ................................................................. 10
Question ID 109 - Bold text and ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6 ............................................ 12
Question ID 157 - ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement GOV, and specification in the topical ESRS ........ 16
Question ID 429 – Entity-specific and ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirements ........................................... 18
Question ID 442 – Entity-specific metrics .......................................................................................... 21
ESRS 1 chapter 2 Qualitative characteristics of information .............................................................. 22
Question ID 337 – Metrics calculation – same level of precision ...................................................... 22
Question ID 863 – Metrics calculation – annual average .................................................................. 24
ESRS 1 chapter 3 Double materiality as the basis for sustainability disclosures ................................ 25
Question ID 37 - Positive impact only ............................................................................................... 25
Question ID 162 - Minimum number of material matters................................................................. 26
Question ID 172 – Materiality assessment – private equity structures ............................................. 27
Question ID 185 – Objective evidence and stakeholders’ opinion .................................................... 29
Question ID 461 - Sustainability statement – ESRS 1 flowchart E and disclosure of transition plans 30
Question ID 821 – Risk and opportunity for financial materiality ..................................................... 32
ESRS 1 chapter 5 Value chain iQuestion ID 41 - Financial institutions – scope of reporting
boundaryiRelease date ..................................................................................................................... 34
Question ID 148 - Scope of consolidation for non-EU and unconsolidated subsidiaries ................... 36
Question ID 217 - Prudential consolidation....................................................................................... 37
ESRS 1 chapter 6 Time horizons ........................................................................................................ 38
Question ID 180 - Time horizon: impact versus financial materiality ................................................ 38
Question ID 286 - Financial year different from calendar year ......................................................... 40
ESRS 1 chapter 7 preparation and presentation of sustainability information................................... 41
Question ID 552 – Comparative information..................................................................................... 41
ESRS 1 chapter 8 Structure of sustainability statement ..................................................................... 43
Question ID 38 - Structure of the sustainability statement ............................................................... 43
Question ID 296 – Location of ESRS 2-related Disclosure Requirements in topical standards .......... 44
Question ID 401 - Include quantitative information in qualitative information ................................ 45
Question ID 426 – Structure of the sustainability statement ............................................................ 46
Question ID 762 – Location of policies, actions and targets in the sustainability report .................. 48
Question ID 906 – Structure of sustainability statement – annex / appendix possible? ................... 50
ESRS 1 chapter 9 Linkages with other parts of corporate reporting and connected information ....... 51
Question ID 243 - Reference to financial statements ........................................................................ 51
ESRS 1 chapter 10 Transitional provisions ......................................................................................... 53
Question ID 204 - Phase-in for first-time large undertakings ............................................................ 53
Question ID 291 - Phase-in 750 employees and topical standards ................................................... 53
Question ID 910 – Transitional provisions for value chain and Scope 3 GHG emissions ................... 55
ESRS 2 General disclosures ................................................................................................... 56
Question ID 733 – Overlap of ESRS 2 and topical standards ............................................................. 56
ESRS 2 BP-2 Disclosure in relation to specific circumstances ............................................................. 58
Question ID 58 - Transitional provisions 750 employees................................................................... 58
Question ID 504 – Disclosure Requirements on material metrics when information is not available
........................................................................................................................................................... 61
ESRS 2 GOV-1 The role of administrative, management and supervisory bodies ............................... 62
Question ID 171 and ID 358 – Administrative, management and supervisory bodies ...................... 62
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 3 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Question ID 728 – Representation of employees and other workers ............................................... 63
Question ID 781 – General Meeting .................................................................................................. 64
ESRS 2 SBM-1 Strategy, business model and value chain .................................................................. 65
Question ID 39 – SBM-1 sector breakdown and phase-in ................................................................. 65
Question ID 293 - Relationship of strategy and policy....................................................................... 66
Question ID 395 – Revenue/net revenue .......................................................................................... 67
Question ID 482 – Breakdown of total revenue – financial institutions ............................................ 69
ESRS 2 SBM 3 Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and
business model ................................................................................................................................. 71
Question ID 67 - ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement SBM-3 vocabulary/grammar used ....................... 71
ESRS 2 IRO-1 Description of the processes to identify and assess material impacts, risks and
opportunities .................................................................................................................................... 72
Question ID 245 – Climate-risk analysis ............................................................................................ 72
Question ID 517 – Disclosure of thresholds ...................................................................................... 73
ESRS 2 IRO-2 Disclosure Requirements in ESRS covered by the undertaking’s sustainability statement
......................................................................................................................................................... 75
Question ID 335 - Applicability of EU data points – Appendix B ....................................................... 75
Question ID 628 – Content index ...................................................................................................... 77
ESRS 2 Minimum disclosure requirement on policies and actions ..................................................... 78
Question ID 306 - Location of MDR in the report during phase-in 750 employees .......................... 78
Questions related to Environment ............................................................................. 80
ESRS E1 Climate change ....................................................................................................... 80
ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 .................................................................. 80
Question ID 350 - Gross risk .............................................................................................................. 80
ESRS E1-4 Targets related to climate change mitigation and adaptation ........................................... 81
Question ID 206 - Climate-related targets ......................................................................................... 81
ESRS E1-5 Energy consumption and mix ........................................................................................... 83
Question ID 36 - Energy mix .............................................................................................................. 83
Question ID 338 – Activities in high-climate impact sectors ............................................................. 84
ESRS E1-6 Gross scopes 1, 2, 3 and total GHG emissions ................................................................... 86
Question ID 81 - Subsidiaries and holding company – alignment for GHG protocol ......................... 86
Question ID 43 - Scope 3 GHG emissions for insurance companies .................................................. 87
Question ID 167 - GHG protocol scope 3; sector ............................................................................... 89
Question ID 208 - GHG emission calculation ..................................................................................... 90
Question ID 251 - Emission factors disclosure ................................................................................... 91
Question ID 268 – GHG emissions and annual update ...................................................................... 92
Question ID 414 – Disaggregation of total emissions ........................................................................ 93
Question ID 535 – Emission trading schemes.................................................................................... 97
Question ID 698 – Database for GHG emission factors ..................................................................... 99
Question ID 718 – Disaggregation of GHG emissions ...................................................................... 100
ESRS E1-7 GHG removals and GHG mitigation projects financed through carbon credits ................ 102
Question ID 432 – Net zero target and GHG removals .................................................................... 102
Question ID 536 – Carbon credit – Quality standards ..................................................................... 104
Question ID 577 – GHG removals – project definitions ................................................................... 105
Question ID 636 – Definition of types of removals ......................................................................... 106
ESRS E1-9 Anticipated financial effects from material physical and transition risks and potential
climate-related opportunities ......................................................................................................... 108
Question ID 422 – Asset at risk, disclosure of monetary amount ................................................... 108
Question ID 555- Financial effects and climate risk......................................................................... 110
ESRS E2 Pollution ............................................................................................................... 112
ESRS E2-1 Policies related to pollution ............................................................................................ 112
Question ID 186 – Substances of very high concern ....................................................................... 112
ESRS E2-4 Pollution of air, water and soil ........................................................................................ 113
Question ID 201 – Oil spills – Chemical spills .................................................................................. 113
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 4 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Question ID 440 - Pollutants emissions – disaggregation ................................................................ 115
Question ID 441 - Microplastics ...................................................................................................... 117
ESRS E2-5 Substances of concern and substances of very high concern .......................................... 118
Question ID 226 and 301– Substances of (very high) concern and hazard classes ......................... 118
ESRS E3 Water and marine resources .................................................................................. 122
ESRS E4 Biodiversity ........................................................................................................... 122
ESRS E4-5 – Impact metrics related to biodiversity and ecosystems change .................................... 122
Question ID 802 - Reference lists of biodiversity-sensitive areas .................................................... 122
ESRS E5 Resource use and circular economy ....................................................................... 124
Questions related to Social ..................................................................................... 124
ESRS S1 Own workforce ..................................................................................................... 124
ESRS S1-4 Taking action on material impacts and approaches to mitigating material risks and
pursuing material opportunities related to own workforce, and effectiveness of those actions and
approaches ..................................................................................................................................... 124
Question ID 214 - Resources to manage material impacts .............................................................. 124
ESRS S1-6 Characteristics of the undertaking’s employees .............................................................. 125
Question ID 31 - Breakdown of temporary, permanent, and non-guaranteed hours employees ... 125
Question ID 32 – Methodology for presenting information on employees .................................... 126
Question ID 365 - Significant employment ...................................................................................... 128
ESRS S1-7 Characteristics of non-employee workers in the undertakings’ own workforce .............. 129
Question ID 33 - Definition of non-employees ................................................................................ 129
ESRS S1-8 Collective bargaining coverage and social dialogue......................................................... 130
Question ID 215 - Social dialogue global percentage ...................................................................... 130
Question ID 376 - Definition of collective bargaining ...................................................................... 131
ESRS S1-14 Health and safety metrics ............................................................................................. 132
Question ID 352 - Work-related ill health and fatalities from ill health ........................................... 132
ESRS S1-15 Work-life balance .......................................................................................................... 133
Question ID 340 – Entitlement to family-related leave ................................................................... 133
Question ID 341 - Conditions for paternity, maternity, parental leave ............................................ 134
ESRS S1-16 Remuneration metrics (pay gap and total remuneration) ............................................. 136
Question ID 132 - Gender pay gap .................................................................................................. 136
Question ID 387 - Scope of ESRS S1-16 ........................................................................................... 137
ESRS S2 Policies related to value chain workers .................................................................. 138
Question ID 356 – Sub-contractors Scope S1, S2............................................................................. 138
ESRS S3 Affected communities ........................................................................................... 140
ESRS S4 Consumers and end-users ..................................................................................... 140
Questions related to Governance ............................................................................ 140
ESRS G1 Business conduct .................................................................................................. 140
Question ID 479 – Minimum disclosure requirements and ESRS G1 ............................................... 140
ESRS G1-4 Incidents of corruption or bribery .................................................................................. 141
Question ID 417 - Convictions ......................................................................................................... 141
ESRS G1-5 Political influence and lobbying activities ...................................................................... 142
Question ID 510 – ESRS G1-5 Indirect political contributions and lobbying activities..................... 142
Question ID 560 – Beneficiary of political contributions ................................................................. 143
ESRS G1-6 Payment practices .......................................................................................................... 144
Question ID 419 – Legal proceedings currently outstanding for late payments.............................. 144
Question ID 444 - Payment practices .............................................................................................. 145
Questions related to XBRL and datapoints .......................................................................... 146
Question ID 326 – Implementation of datapoints ........................................................................... 146
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 5 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Appendix I: Table of ID release date ........................................................................ 148
Appendix II: Key word index .................................................................................... 152
Appendix III: Questions rejected as ‘already asked/answered’ and reference to where
they have been answered ....................................................................................... 161
TTTThhhheeee QQQQuuuueeeessssttttiiiioooonnnnssss iiiinnnn tttthhhhiiiissss ddddooooccccuuuummmmeeeennnntttt aaaarrrreeee iiiiddddeeeennnnttttiiiiffffiiiieeeedddd bbbbyyyy tttthhhheeee pppprrrrooooggggrrrreeeessssssssiiiivvvveeee nnnnuuuummmmbbbbeeeerrrr ((((IIIIDDDD)))) tttthhhhaaaatttt tttthhhheeeeyyyy rrrreeeecccceeeeiiiivvvveeee
aaaatttt tttthhhheeee bbbbeeeeggggiiiinnnnnnnniiiinnnngggg ooooffff tttthhhheeee ssssuuuubbbbmmmmiiiissssssssiiiioooonnnn ttttoooo tttthhhheeee QQQQ&&&&AAAA PPPPllllaaaattttffffoooorrrrmmmm.... TTTThhhheeee ssssyyyysssstttteeeemmmm aaaattttttttrrrriiiibbbbuuuutttteeeessss iiiiddddeeeennnnttttiiiiffffiiiiccccaaaattttiiiioooonnnn
nnnnuuuummmmbbbbeeeerrrrssss aaaallllssssoooo ttttoooo ppppaaaarrrrttttiiiiaaaallll ssssuuuubbbbmmmmiiiissssssssiiiioooonnnnssss.... FFFFoooorrrr tttthhhhiiiissss rrrreeeeaaaassssoooonnnn,,,, tttthhhheeee IIIIDDDD nnnnuuuummmmbbbbeeeerrrr iiiissss nnnnooootttt iiiinnnnddddiiiiccccaaaattttiiiivvvveeee ooooffff hhhhoooowwww
mmmmaaaannnnyyyy qqqquuuueeeessssttttiiiioooonnnnssss EEEEFFFFRRRRAAAAGGGG hhhhaaaassss ffffiiiinnnnaaaallllllllyyyy rrrreeeecccceeeeiiiivvvveeeedddd....
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 6 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Introduction
EFRAG has started the collection of questions related to ESRS through the EFRAG ESRS Q&A
Platform on 24 October 2023. EFRAG will release explanations following due process on a regular
basis. Explanations are non-authoritative in nature, answer technical questions on ESRS by
showing where in the standards the content is provided and how to navigate them accordingly.
EFRAG has, since October 2023, released the following batches of explanations:
February 2024 12
March 2024 12
May 2024 44
July 2024 25
Total 93
This document contains all 93 explanations on a consolidated basis. The questions are identified
by a progressive identification number (ID) that they received when submitted to the Q&A
Platform.
To inform when an explanation has been included in this document a release date is provided for
each explanation. Furthermore, a Table of ID release date is added as Appendix I to this document,
showing when an explanation has been released. Explanations approved by the SRB subsequently
will also be consolidated as an update to this document.
Explanations are grouped by topical area:
(a) ESRS General Requirements and General Disclosures ;
(b) Environmental ESRS;
(c) Social ESRS;
(d) Governance ESRS; and
(e) XBRL and datapoints.
To order the explanations in a systematic manner and to increase usability for those looking for
an explanation, they were allocated to ESRS Disclosure Requirements respectively in the case of
ESRS 1 to its chapters.
A key word index in Appendix II supports the search of questions.
The Compilation of Explanations also has now in Appendix III a log of those questions received
that were categorised as ‘already asked/answered’. They were rejected because they were
answered elsewhere. The log has a reference to the location where they have been answered.
For convenience purposes hyperlinks to the official text of the respective ESRS including the
corrigendum published on 18 April 2024 have been added after each ESRS heading in this
document (ESRS including Corrigendum).
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 7 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Questions related to ESRS General requirements and general disclosures
ESRS 1 General requirements
ESRS 1 General requirements
ESRS 1 chapter 1 Categories of ESRS standards, reporting areas, and
drafting conventions
Question ID 29 and ID 261 – ‘May’ and ‘shall’ reporting requirements
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
1) What is the meaning of ‘may disclose’ in ESRS? How does that relate to ‘shall disclose’?
2) Can you explain this based on ESRS Disclosure Requirement S1-12?
In addition, the following more specific questions have been received in ID 261 related to the
‘may’ and ‘shall’ reporting requirements:
3) Does the materiality assessment take precedence over ESRS 1 paragraph 18?
4) Is an undertaking required to disclose a datapoint that is not material if it is a ‘shall
disclose’ datapoint?
5) Can an undertaking disregard the disclosure of a ‘may disclose’ datapoint if the
datapoint is material?
6) What is the relevance of ESRS 1 paragraph 18 if materiality takes precedence over
ESRS 1 paragraph 18?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraphs 18, 77 and 80; ESRS 1 Chapters 1 to 3.5; ESRS 2 paragraph 62 and 72
Key terms
Voluntary disclosure requirements (‘may disclose’)
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 18 states: ‘ESRS uses the following terms to distinguish between different
degrees of obligation on the undertaking to disclose information:
(a) “shall disclose” – indicates that the provision is prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement
or datapoint; and
(b) “may disclose” – indicates voluntary disclosure to encourage good practice.’
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 8 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS S1 paragraph 79 of Disclosure Requirement ESRS S1-12 is a ‘shall’ disclosure and states: ‘The
undertaking shall disclose the percentage of persons with disabilities amongst its employees
subject to legal restrictions on the collection of data.’
ESRS S1 paragraph 80 of Disclosure Requirement ESRS S1-12 is voluntary and states: ‘The
undertaking may disclose the percentage of employees with disabilities with a breakdown by
gender.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 11 states: ‘In addition to the disclosure requirements laid down in the three
categories of ESRS, when an undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not
covered or not covered with sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific
facts and circumstances, it shall provide additional entity-specific disclosures to enable users to
understand the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities.’
In ESRS E1 paragraph AR 32, instead of ‘may disclose’ the expression ‘can disclose’ is used as a
synonym; see, e.g. the statement ‘When preparing the information on energy consumption
required under paragraph 35 … The undertaking that consumes fuel as feedstocks can disclose
information on this consumption separately from the required disclosures’.
Answer
1) What is the meaning of ‘may disclose’ in ESRS? How does that relate to ‘shall
disclose’? Is an undertaking required to disclose a datapoint that is not material if it is
a ‘shall disclose’ datapoint?
The drafting convention used in the ESRS is defined in ESRS 1 Chapter 1.3. The terms ‘shall
disclose’ and ‘may disclose’ are used to distinguish the degree of obligation on the undertaking
to disclose information; these are defined in ESRS 1 paragraph 18. The terms ‘shall disclose’ and
‘may disclose’ are to be applied in light of the materiality provisions of ESRS (refer to ESRS 1
Chapter 3.2 to 3.5).
(a) All the ‘shall’ datapoints in ESRS 2 General Disclosures are to be reported as they are
outside the materiality assessment. This includes the datapoints in topical standards that
relate to ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement IRO-1 Description of the process to identify and
assess material impacts, risks and opportunities (see ESRS 2 Appendix C: Disclosure and
Application Requirements in topical ESRS that are applicable jointly with ESRS 2 General
Disclosures).
(b) If a topic is not material for the undertaking, the ‘may’ and ‘shall’ datapoints in the
corresponding topical standard are not to be reported as the undertaking does not report
on non-material topics.
(c) If a topic is material for the undertaking, the ‘shall’ datapoints in the respective topical
standard that relate to ESRS 2 (refer to Appendix C of ESRS 2 for the complete list by
topical standard) must be reported.
(d) If a topic is material for the undertaking, the undertaking discloses the information
corresponding to the ‘shall’ datapoints in the topical standard in relation to policies,
actions and targets (PAT) as well as the information corresponding to the datapoints in
ESRS 2 MDR-P, MDR-A and MDR-T. If the undertaking cannot disclose the information on
PAT required under relevant topical ESRS because such PAT are not in place for the
specific material matter, it shall disclose this to be the case and provide reasons for not
having PAT. The undertaking may disclose a timeframe in which it aims to adopt them.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 9 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
(e) If a topic is material for the undertaking, the undertaking discloses the information
corresponding to the ‘shall’ datapoints in the topical standard in relation to metrics if that
information is assessed to be material (refer to ESRS 1 paragraph 34), i.e. the undertaking
is not required to disclose a ‘shall disclose’ datapoint that is not material.
(f) If a topic (or a matter) is material for the undertaking, the undertaking decides whether
or not to include the ‘may’ disclosure datapoints related to that matter; however, it is
encouraged to disclose it as good practice, but it is not a requirement.
The criteria in paragraph 31 of ESRS 1 (significance of the information and users’ needs) are the
point of reference to be used when:
(a) defining the granularity of the content of the information provided under points (a), (c)
and (d) above; and
(b) assessing the materiality of the information under point (e) above.
2) Can you explain this based on ESRS Disclosure Requirement S1-12?
Assuming that the sub-subtopic ‘employment and inclusion of persons with disabilities’ is
assessed to be material, the undertaking must disclose the metric ‘percentage of persons with
disabilities amongst its employees subject to legal restrictions on the collection of data’ (ESRS S1
paragraph 79). While this is not a requirement, it may provide a breakdown by gender as an
optional good practice (ESRS S1 paragraph 80).
3) Does the materiality assessment take precedence over ESRS 1 paragraph 18?
No, for optional disclosures the materiality assessment does not take precedence over ESRS 1
paragraph 18. This means that for a topic that is assessed as material (see previous example on
S1-12) it is optional, but the undertaking is encouraged to disclose a ‘may’ datapoint also if the
information pertaining to the datapoint in question is material.
Reference is made to the paragraph that is in the answer to question (1) above.
4) Can an undertaking disregard the disclosure of a ‘may disclose’ datapoint if the
datapoint is material?
Yes, see example on ESRS S1-12. This is due to the nature of the ‘may’ datapoint (a voluntary
datapoint to encourage good practice).
5) What is the relevance of ESRS 1 paragraph 18 if materiality takes precedence over
ESRS 1 paragraph 18?
ESRS 1 paragraph 18 illustrates the nature or drafting convention used for the datapoints, and it
has to be applied in conjunction with the materiality considerations – i.e. the ‘shall’ datapoints
are still subject to materiality assessment.
Question ID 106 - Entity-specific guidance and examples
Release date
February 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 10 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Question asked
What are concrete examples of potential entity-specific sustainability matters and any guidance
related to finding and dealing with such?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 10.1 and paragraphs 10, AR 4 and AR 5
Key terms
Entity-specific disclosures
Background
ESRS 1 chapter 10.1 ‘Transitional provision related to entity-specific disclosures’ states in its
paragraphs the following:
‘130. The extent to which sustainability matters are covered by ESRS is expected to evolve as
further Disclosure Requirements are developed. Therefore, the need for entity-specific
disclosures is likely to decrease over time, in particular as a result of the future adoption of sector
specific standards.
131. When defining its entity-specific disclosures, the undertaking may adopt transitional
measures for their preparation in the first three annual sustainability statements under which it
may as a priority:
(a) introduce in its reporting those entity-specific disclosures that it reported in prior periods, if
these disclosures meet or are adapted to meet the qualitative characteristics of information
referred to under chapter 2 of this Standard; and
(b) complement its disclosures prepared on the basis of the topical ESRS with an appropriate set
of additional disclosures to cover sustainability matters that are material for the undertaking
in its sector(s), using available best practice and/or available frameworks or reporting
standards, such as IFRS industry-based guidance and GRI Sector Standards.’
ESRS 1 paragraph AR 4 and 5 state:
‘AR 4. When developing its entity-specific disclosures, the undertaking shall carefully consider:
comparability between undertakings, while still ensuring relevance of the information provided,
recognising that comparability may be limited for entity-specific disclosures. The undertaking shall
consider whether the available and relevant frameworks, initiatives, reporting standards and
benchmarks (such as technical material issued by the International Sustainability Standards Board
or the Global Reporting Initiative) provide elements that can support comparability to the
maximum extent possible.
AR 5. Further guidance for developing entity-specific disclosures can be found by considering the
information required under topical ESRS that addresses similar sustainability matters.’
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 11 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Answer
At this stage, it is not possible to provide concrete examples as this will depends on facts and
circumstances of the reporting undertaking, including the sector(s) it is operating in. Sector-
specific sustainability matters will be addressed in the future sector standards still to be finalized.
When developing entity-specific disclosures (ESRS 1, paragraph 11), ESRS 1 points to ‘available
and relevant frameworks, initiatives, standards, benchmarks’. Two examples are provided as
possible sources of relevant entity-specific disclosures (see ESRS 1 paragraph 131 (b)): the IFRS
industry-based guidance and the GRI Sector Standards.
The IFRS industry-based guidance is the former SASB standards; they can be found here:
https://sasb.org/standards/download/ and GRI Sector Standards can be downloaded from
https://www.globalreporting.org/standards/sector-program/
These two sources offer examples of sector-specific information that could complement on an
entity-specific basis the information required in sector-agnostic ESRS depending on the relevant
sector.
In general, there are two types of instances that will give rise to entity-specific information:
(a) when the undertaking identifies a material matter that is not covered by Disclosure
Requirements in ESRS; and
(b) when, for a matter that is covered by Disclosure Requirements in ESRS, the undertaking
concludes that in order to provide information that meets the qualitative characteristics
of the information (Appendix B of ESRS 1) additional disclosures need to be included. This
may be the case for a specific aspect of a sub-subtopic (see AR 16 of ESRS 1) when such a
sub-subtopic is covered in ESRS but the specific aspects (i.e., an additional level of
granularity) is not covered. This may also be the case for a specific metric that is not
included in ESRS, but considering the specific facts and circumstances of the undertaking,
this metric is necessary in order to provide the appropriate quality of information.
The entity-specific information may relate to the description of a material impact, risk or
opportunity (along the lines of ESRS 2 SBM 3), it may relate to policies, actions and targets that
the undertaking has set, or it may relate to metrics.
Question ID 109 - Bold text and ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
Is the ‘bolded paragraph’ following each ESRS Disclosure Requirement a disclosure that the
undertaking has to respond to? Or is it simply a ‘headline’ that prescribes what the paragraph will
contain once all the individual datapoints are completed? Reference is made to ESRS E1 Disclosure
Requirement E1-6.
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 and all topical ESRS, especially ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 12 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Key terms
‘Bolded paragraph’; ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6
Background
In ESRS 2 and in the topical ESRS, Disclosure Requirements are generally followed by a ‘bold
paragraph’ stating ‘The undertaking shall disclose . . .’ with a general statement of the information
that needs to be disclosed under the respective Disclosure Requirement.
The ‘bold paragraph’ is followed by an objective paragraph, which is followed by more detailed
paragraphs containing the datapoints that must be disclosed under the respective Disclosure
Requirement and further specifications of the information being requested.
In the case of ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6, this is as follows:
ESRS E1 paragraph 44 provides a ‘bold paragraph’ with the general statement of the requirement
that needs to be satisfied under ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6.;
ESRS E1 paragraph 45 outlines the objective of the disclosure requirement; and
ESRS E1 paragraphs 46-52 further specify information to be included when disclosing on ESRS E1
paragraph 44.
This is illustrated as follows:
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 13 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 14 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Answer
The ‘bold paragraph’ that introduces each Disclosure Requirement is not simply a headline. It is a
general statement of what needs to be disclosed under the respective Disclosure Requirement.
The information provided under a Disclosure Requirement should satisfy the overall objective of
it, as stated in the paragraph following the bold paragraph (‘the objective of this Disclosure
Requirement is . . .’).
The subsequent paragraphs include a list of datapoints (‘the disclosure provided under paragraph
XXX shall include . . .’). This list is generally sufficient to meet the disclosure requirements;
however, such a list cannot be assumed to be exhaustive, as meeting the disclosure requirement
takes precedent over the list of datapoints.
In providing the disclosure that corresponds to the list of individual datapoints (if applicable per
the related Application Requirements), it is assumed that both the following are met:
(a) requirements of the ‘bold paragraph’; and
(b) objective as stated in the subsequent paragraph.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 15 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
The ‘bold paragraph’ of ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6 (i.e., ESRS E1 paragraph 44) covers
Scope 1, 2 and 3 and total GHG emissions. The objective of the Disclosure Requirements also
covers Scope 1, 2 and 3 and total GHG emissions. ESRS E1 paragraph 52 mentions the total GHG
emissions. The total GHG emissions shall be reported as it is included in both the bold paragraph
and the objective.
Question ID 157 - ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement GOV, and
specification in the topical ESRS
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
When a topical standard does not include Disclosure Requirements that are applicable jointly with
ESRS 2 (ref. to Appendix C of ESRS 2), are ESRS 2 requirements applicable in relation to that topic?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraphs 9 and 29; ESRS 2 GOV 1 to 5; ESRS E1 paragraph 13
Key terms
ESRS 2 related disclosures in topical standards
Background
[The original question received was reworded to the above; the original question was: ‘If there is
no additional guidance, then do the other disclosure requirements do not apply to the topical
standard (meaning GOV 1 and GOV 2 do not apply)? Or do they all still apply, but there is just
more guidance to follow (such that there is more specific guidance for GOV 3 specifically when
reporting on E1)?’]
In the architecture of the ESRS, the two cross-cutting standards ESRS 1 General Requirements and
ESRS 2 General Disclosures are complemented by ten topical standards (E, S and G). ESRS 1
paragraph 9 states: ‘Topical ESRS can include specific requirements that complement the general
level Disclosure Requirements of ESRS 2. ESRS 2 Appendix C Disclosure/Application Requirements
in topical ESRS that are applicable jointly with ESRS 2 General Disclosures provides a list of the
additional requirements in topical ESRS that the undertaking shall apply in conjunction with the
general level disclosure requirements of ESRS 2.’
ESRS 2 disclosure requirements are ‘cross-cutting in nature’, so they do not refer to a specific topic,
but some of them also have topical specifications in the topical standards as explained in ESRS 2
Appendix C. An example is ESRS 2 GOV-3 ‘Integration of sustainability-related performance in
incentive schemes’: this disclosure requirement (paragraphs 27-29) has a specification in the
climate topical standard ESRS E1 paragraph 13.
ESRS E1 paragraph 13: ‘The undertaking shall disclose whether and how climate-related
considerations are factored into the remuneration of members of the administrative,
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 16 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
management and supervisory bodies , including if their performance has been assessed against
the GHG emission reduction targets reported under Disclosure Requirement E1-4 and the
percentage of the remuneration recognised in the current period that is linked to climate related
considerations, with an explanation of what the climate considerations are.’
A basic principle is that the requirements in the topical standards should be read and applied in
conjunction with the cross-cutting standards.
Furthermore, all topical standards are subject to materiality assessment.
Answer
Disclosure Requirements (DRs), including their datapoints, in the cross-cutting standard ESRS 2
General Disclosures are to be reported irrespective of the outcome of the materiality assessment
(for example, GOV-1, GOV-2, GOV-3, GOV-4, and GOV-5), see ESRS 1 paragraph 29. The content of
ESRS 2 (with the exception of MDR – P, A, T) is not intended to provide a content to be followed
in each and every topic, but it provides content that is to be provided at corporate/general level
(across all the topics).
All topical standards should be read in conjunction with the cross-cutting standards ESRS 1 and
ESRS 2, as these apply to the sustainability statement as a whole.
There are datapoints related to the ESRS 2 DRs in some of the topical standards. These are outlined
in the table in ESRS 2 Appendix C, Disclosure and Application Requirements in topical ESRS that
are applicable in conjunction with ESRS 2 General disclosures. They include GOV-1 in ESRS G1
‘Business conduct’, paragraph 5, and GOV-3 in ESRS E1 ‘Climate change’, paragraph 13.
The topical specifications of ESRS 2 DRs listed in Appendix C of ESRS 2 provide additional
datapoints that shall be included and/or additional considerations that the undertaking has to
take into account when preparing the respective ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirements.
In terms of the scope of the materiality assessment:
(c) ESRS 1 paragraph 29 specifies the Disclosure Requirements always to be included
irrespective of the outcome of materiality. These include the ESRS 2 IRO-1 requirements
(listed in Appendix C of ESRS 2) that are located in the topical standards, which are to be
applied also if the respective topic is not material.
(d) Other ESRS 2 specifications (listed in Appendix C of ESRS 2) and the other disclosure
requirements located in topical standards are subject to materiality assessment. This
implies that the undertaking only has to report on them when the respective topic is
considered material. This avoids having to report, for example, on GOV-1 ‘Business
conduct’ (topical standard) if the topic ‘Business conduct’ has been determined not to be
material to the undertaking.
(e) All narrative disclosures including those in ESRS 2 should be applied with consideration
to paragraph 31 of ESRS 1, which sets the criteria for assessing the materiality of
information to be provided and ultimately affect the granularity of the reported
information.
When a Disclosure Requirement in ESRS 2 does not have topical specifications, ESRS 2 has to be
applied as specified in ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement. No additional datapoints to those in ESRS
2 or considerations at topical level apply in these cases. If ESRS 2 does not set topical specifications
for a given topic, ESRS SBM-3 requires nevertheless to disclose material impacts, risks and
opportunities for that material topic.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 17 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Question ID 429 – Entity-specific and ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirements
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
When addressing the required entity-specific disclosure, which are the datapoints or the
Disclosure Requirements to consider from ESRS 2?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraphs 11, 30, 60 and 70
Key terms
Entity-specific disclosures
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 11 states: ‘In addition to the disclosure requirements laid down in the three
categories of ESRS, when an undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not
covered or not covered with sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific
facts and circumstances, it shall provide additional entity-specific disclosures to enable users to
understand the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities. Application
requirements AR 1 to AR 5 provide further guidance regarding entity-specific disclosures.’
In particular, ESRS paragraph AR 2 states: ‘When developing entity-specific disclosures, the
undertaking shall ensure that … (b) its disclosures include, where applicable, all material
information related to the reporting areas of governance; strategy; impact, risk and opportunity
management; and metrics and targets (see ESRS 2 chapters 2 to 5).’
ESRS 1 paragraph 30 states: ‘When the undertaking concludes that a sustainability matter is
material as a result of its materiality assessment on which ESRS 2 IRO-1, IRO-2 and SBM-3 set
disclosure requirements, it shall:
(a) disclose information according to the Disclosure Requirements (including Application
Requirements) related to that specific sustainability matter in the corresponding topical
and sector-specific ESRS; and
(b) disclose additional entity-specific disclosures (see paragraph 11 and AR 1 to AR 5 of this
Standard) when the material sustainability matter is not covered by an ESRS or is covered
with insufficient granularity.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 12 states the following regarding ‘Reporting areas and minimum content
disclosure requirements on policies, actions, targets and metrics’: ‘The Disclosure Requirements
in ESRS 2 in topical ESRS and in sector-specific ESRS are structured into the following reporting
areas:
(a) Governance (GOV): the governance processes controls and procedures used to monitor,
manage and oversee impacts, risks and opportunities (see ESRS 2 Chapter 2 Governance);
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 18 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
(b) Strategy (SBM): how the undertaking’s strategy and business model interact with its
material impacts, risks and opportunities, including how the undertaking addresses those
impacts, risks and opportunities (see ESRS 2 Chapter 3 Strategy);
(c) Impact, risk and opportunity management (IRO): the process(es) by which the
undertaking:
(i) identifies impacts, risks and opportunities and assesses their materiality (see IRO-
1 in Section 4.1 of ESRS 2);
(ii) manages material sustainability matters through policies and actions (see Section
4.2 of ESRS 2);
(d) Metrics and targets (MT): the undertaking’s performance including targets it has set and
progress towards meeting them (see ESRS 2 Chapter 5 Metrics and targets).’
ESRS 2 paragraph 60 on minimum disclosure requirements on policies and actions states: ‘This
section sets out minimum disclosure requirements to be included when the undertaking discloses
information on its policies and actions to prevent, mitigate and remediate actual and potential
material impacts, to address material risks and/or to pursue material opportunities (collectively,
to “manage material sustainability matters”). They shall be applied together with the Disclosure
Requirements, including Application Requirements, provided in the relevant topical and sector-
specific ESRS. They shall also be applied when the undertaking prepares entity-specific
disclosures.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 70 on metrics and targets states: ‘This chapter sets out Minimum Disclosure
Requirements that shall be included when the undertaking discloses information on its metrics
and targets related to each material sustainability matter. They shall be applied together with the
Disclosure Requirements, including Application Requirements, provided in the relevant topical
ESRS. They shall also be applied when the undertaking prepares entity-specific disclosures.’
Answer
The datapoints or the Disclosure Requirements from ESRS 2 to consider, if applicable, when
addressing a required entity-specific disclosure are: ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement GOV-1 to
GOV-5, SBM-1 to SBM-3, IRO-1 and the Minimum Disclosure Requirements on policies and actions
on metrics and targets, respectively.
ESRS 1 paragraph AR 1 to 5 provides Application Requirements on entity-specific disclosures.
In situations where a sustainability matter is not covered by an ESRS, the entity-specific
disclosures to consider from ESRS 2 could potentially relate to any reporting area of ESRS 2 (for
the reporting areas of ESRS 2, see ESRS 1 paragraph 12), that is:
(a) governance;
(b) strategy;
(c) impact, risk and opportunity management; and
(d) metrics and targets.
This is insofar as information regarding the entity-specific sustainability matter and its impact,
risk and opportunity is relevant (ESRS 1 paragraph 31) and it needs to be disclosed under the
ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirements.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 19 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Therefore, if applicable, impacts, risks and opportunities of the entity-specific matter could be
addressed by the following ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirements:
(a) GOV-1: regarding roles and responsibilities and access to expertise and skills with regard
to the entity-specific sustainability matter;
(b) GOV-2: regarding information related to the entity-specific sustainability matter provided
to and addressed by the undertaking’s administrative, management and supervisory
bodies;
(c) GOV-3: regarding integration of the entity-specific sustainability matter in incentive
schemes;
(d) GOV-4: regarding entity-specific due diligence processes;
(e) GOV-5: regarding risk management and internal controls over the sustainability process,
including the entity-specific sustainability matter;
(f) SBM-1: regarding its strategy relating to the entity-specific sustainability matter;
(g) SBM-2: regarding interests and views of stakeholders with respect to the entity-specific
sustainability matter;
(h) SBM-3: regarding the description, the interaction with strategy and business model and
other information required by paragraph 48 of ESRS 2 on the material impacts, risks and
opportunities connected with the entity-specific matter (including ESRS 2 paragraph 48
(h)); and
(i) IRO-1: regarding a description of the process to identify and assess the entity-specific
material impacts, risk and opportunities.
In addition (following ESRS 1 paragraph AR 2):
(a) policies, actions and targets shall be included where applicable, i.e. when the undertaking
has them in place, to manage the relevant entity-specific matter/IRO; and
(b) metrics shall be included where applicable. In assessing when this is applicable, the
reference is ESRS 1 AR 1: the entity-specific disclosures shall enable users to understand
the undertaking’s material IROs. In general, to provide a relevant and fair representation
of an impact, risk or opportunity, metrics are useful and should be included.
ESRS paragraph AR 3 supports the determination of when entity-specific metrics are useful, i.e.:
(a) when they support the understanding of (1) how effective the practices are in reducing
negative impacts and increasing positive impacts and (2) how likely the financial effects
arising from risks and opportunities are;
(b) when they result in a reliable outcome (see ESRS 1 paragraph AR 3 (b)); and
(c) when they are accompanied by sufficient contextual information (see ESRS 1 paragraph
AR 3 (c)).
ESRS 2 Minimum Disclosure Requirements on policies and actions (ESRS 2 paragraph 60) and
metrics and targets (ESRS 2 paragraph 70) shall be applied in the preparation of this disclosure.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 20 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Question ID 442 – Entity-specific metrics
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Do entity-specific metrics need to be developed for a topic that is covered in the standards but is
only for a specific part of the value chain?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraphs 11, 30, AR 1-5 and AR 16; ESRS 2 paragraphs 48 (h) and 51; and ESRS 2 MDR
Key terms
Entity-specific disclosure on matters not covered by ESRS Disclosure Requirements
Background
The submitter provided the following background for the question: ‘... for example, a company
has identified a matter as material for which the topic of water is relevant in the value chain. In
the ESRS E3 standard, the topic of water in the value chain is covered by datapoints in the areas
of Policies, Targets and Actions. However, the associated metric relates exclusively to the
company’s own business activities (ESRS E3 paragraph 28-29). Can it now be deduced from
paragraph 30 (b) in ESRS 1 that the company must develop an entity-specific metric for this matter
because there is insufficient “granularity” here, or has the EU deliberately limited the metric to
its own business activities so that no metric for water use in the value chain has to be explicitly
developed?’
ESRS 1 paragraph 11 states: ‘In addition to the disclosure requirements laid down in the three
categories of ESRS, when an undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not
covered or not covered with sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific
facts and circumstances, it shall provide additional entity-specific disclosures to enable users to
understand the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities. Application
requirements AR 1 to AR 5 provide further guidance regarding entity-specific disclosures.’
ESRS 1 paragraphs AR 1 and AR 2 state: ‘AR 1. The entity-specific disclosures shall enable users to
understand the undertaking’s impacts, risks and opportunities in relation to environmental, social
or governance matters.
AR 2. When developing entity-specific disclosures, the undertaking shall ensure that:
(a) the disclosures meet the qualitative characteristics of information as set out in chapter
2 Qualitative characteristics of information; and
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 21 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
(b) its disclosures include where applicable all material information related to the reporting
areas of governance; strategy; impact, risk and opportunity management; and metrics
and targets (see ESRS 2 chapters 2 to 5).’
ESRS 1 paragraph 65 states: ‘The undertaking shall include material value chain information when
this is necessary to:
(a) allow users of sustainability statements to understand the undertaking’s material
impacts, risks and opportunities; and/or
(b) produce a set of information that meets the qualitative characteristics of information (see
Appendix B of this Standard).’
Answer
Entity-specific disclosure shall be provided in addition to the Disclosure Requirements laid down
in the three categories of ESRS (i.e., cross-cutting, topical and sector-specific standards) when an
undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not covered or not covered with
sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific facts and circumstances (ESRS
1 paragraph 11).
If an undertaking has concluded that a topic is material in its value chain, but the relevant topical
standard only requires to disclose metrics related to own operations, the provision of metrics that
cover specifically the value chain shall be considered and provided if such metrics are necessary
according to paragraph 11 of ESRS 1. Sector ESRS may introduce additional metrics, including on
the value chain.
ESRS 1 chapter 2 Qualitative characteristics of information
Question ID 337 – Metrics calculation – same level of precision
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
When calculating metrics for sustainability matters that are material for a group, do the data of
all subsidiaries have to be considered with the same level of accuracy even if the matter is not
material for some subsidiaries of the group?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 2 Qualitative characteristics of information
Key terms
Metrics calculation – same level of accuracy
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 22 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Background
The submitter provided the following background for his question: ‘The following example refers
to metrics in the context of water and marine resources. However, it should be noted that the
question raised similarly applies to all sustainability matters and metrics and that the subtopic
“water” was chosen for illustration purposes only.
Example: The main business of a group is manufacturing and selling a specific product, which is
produced in a water-intensive production process in various own facilities. The group further
owns and operates several sales corporations abroad, with a limited number of employees
working in offices not being involved in production-related activities. The group determines that
all topics and subtopics mentioned in ESRS E3 on water and marine resources are material and
concludes that all metrics governed by ESRS E3 need to be disclosed.
Furthermore, based on a preliminary estimate, the group notes that its production facilities will
bear the vast majority of the amounts of all metric data on this topic, whereas the sales
corporations would account for a marginal portion of those metrics, which consequently the
group considers not to be material. However, the group is aware of the requirement to calculate
the metrics based on own operations, i.e., including the parent company and all the subsidiaries
of the group. Therefore, it has established processes and procedures to measure directly and with
precision the part of the metrics attributable to the group’s production facilities, whereas it
continues to determine the part of the metrics attributable to its sales corporations based on
estimations such as average per capita figures. The total metrics disclosed is therefore the total
of the portion directly measured and a respective estimate.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 87 states: ’When quantitative metrics and monetary amounts including
upstream and downstream value chain information (see chapter 5 of this Standard) cannot be
measured directly and can only be estimated, measurement uncertainty may arise.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 89 states: ‘The use of reasonable assumptions and estimates including scenario
or sensitivity analysis is an essential part of preparing sustainability-related information and does
not undermine the usefulness of that information, provided that the assumptions and estimates
are accurately described and explained. Even a high level of measurement uncertainty would not
necessarily prevent such an assumption or estimate from providing useful information or meeting
the qualitative characteristics of information (see Appendix B of this Standard).’
Answer
When providing metrics data, the undertaking is expected to comply with the text of ESRS by
providing the metric as defined in the Disclosure Requirement:
(a) data from all subsidiaries need to be included (unless the Disclosure Requirement of the
metric provides otherwise; see IG 1 Materiality assessment: FAQ 22 – Is a multi-sector
group required to include metrics for the entire group or only data related to the material
IRO?); and
(b) the use of estimates is subject to conditions (see ESRS 1 paragraphs 87 and 89), including
the need to consider the qualitative characteristics (ESRS 1 chapter 2).
In the example mentioned by the submitter, the undertaking will have to consider whether
precisely measuring the portion of the metrics attributable to the production facility – and using
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 23 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
an estimate for the portion attributable to the sales corporation – will result in a degree of
accuracy for the entire metric that is consistent with the characteristics of information quality.
Reference is made to IG 1 Materiality assessment – FAQ 18: Does the undertaking use the same
criteria when defining the level of disaggregation across all IROs? which deals with related issues.
Question ID 863 – Metrics calculation – Annual average
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
When calculating metrics, including value chain metrics, do we have to consider downstream
positions for all four quarters (as of 31.03, 30.06, 30.09, 31.12)?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 2 and paragraph 89; all topical ESRS
Key terms
Metrics calculation; annual average
Background
[The original question asked, ‘When calculating Indicators including Value Chain for the financial
sector (Capital markets, Insurance), do we have to consider downstream positions for all four
quarters (as of 31.03, 30.06, 30.09, 31.12)?’ was referring to metrics calculation in the financial
sector but, to be more general, the question was changed to the above.
As background to the question, the submitter provided the following: ‘Background is that SFDR
requires calculating PAIs for all relevant positions as per quarter end and then build an average.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 19 states: ‘When preparing its sustainability statement, the undertaking shall
apply:
(a) the fundamental qualitative characteristics of information, i.e. relevance and faithful
representation; and
(b) the enhancing qualitative characteristics of information, i.e. comparability,
verifiability and understandability.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 89 states: ‘The use of reasonable assumptions and estimates, including scenario
or sensitivity analysis, is an essential part of preparing sustainability-related information and does
not undermine the usefulness of that information, provided that the assumptions and estimates
are accurately described and explained. Even a high level of measurement uncertainty would not
necessarily prevent such an assumption or estimate from providing useful information or meeting
the qualitative characteristics of information (see Appendix B of this Standard).’
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 24 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Answer
ESRS do not require to calculate annual averages based on quarterly figures as required in
Article 6 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/363.
Some metrics require the calculation of annual averages (e.g. ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-
6 – Characteristics of the undertaking’s employees). ESRS do not prescribe how to calculate annual
averages as long as the calculation method results in information that meets the qualitative
characteristics of information (ESRS 1 Chapter 2; see also ESRS 1 paragraph 89).
Supporting material
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/363 of 31 October 2022 states in Article 6:
‘Description of the principal adverse impacts of investment decisions on sustainability factors … 3.
Financial market participants shall include in the columns ‘Impact’ in the section ‘Description of
the principal adverse impacts on sustainability factors’ in Table 1 of Annex I, figure on impact as
the average of impacts on 31 March, 30 June, 30 September and 31 December of each period
from 1 January to 31 December.’
ESRS 1 chapter 3 Double materiality as the basis for sustainability
disclosures
Question ID 37 - Positive impact only
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Can a sustainability matter be material from a positive impact perspective only?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 3.4; ESRS 1 paragraph 43 and 46
Key terms
Materiality, positive impact only material
Background
[The question received by the submitter: ‘Can an impact be material if it is material from a positive
impact perspective only?’ was reworded to the above to be clearer.]
Background as provided by the submitter:
‘It is essential that when I have evaluated and qualitatively assessed the actual/potential negative
and positive effects on human beings and the environment, I have concluded that the topic is
irrelevant in terms of actual negative impacts and also irrelevant in terms of actual positive
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 25 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
impacts. However, it is critical from the perspective of potential positive impacts. Is my topic then
considered significant?’
ESRS 1 paragraph 43 states: ‘A sustainability matter is material from an impact perspective when
it pertains to the undertaking’s material actual or potential, positive or negative impacts on people
or the environment over the short-, medium- or long-term.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 46 states the criteria on which positive impacts materiality are based:
‘For positive impacts, materiality is based on:
(a) the scale and scope of the impact for actual impacts; and
(b) the scale, scope and likelihood of the impact for potential impacts.’
Answer
Yes, a sustainability matter can be material from a positive impact perspective only.
Based on the definition in ESRS 1 paragraph 43, a sustainability matter is material when it
pertains:
(a) to material actual or potential impacts or
(b) to material positive or negative impacts.
Positive impacts can be either actual or potential.
ESRS 1 chapter 3.4 defines the criteria used to assess materiality. For actual positive impacts, the
criteria are scale and scope. In addition, for potential positive impacts likelihood is considered.
ESRS 1 paragraph 45 describes the relationship between negative impacts and the due diligence
process defined in international instruments (i.e., the UN Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights and the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises). In particular, due diligence
focuses on negative or adverse impacts on people and the environment, but this does not mean
that impact materiality is limited to negative impacts under ESRS reporting.
Question ID 162 - Minimum number of material matters
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
Is there a minimum number of material sustainability matters to be disclosed in the sustainability
statement of the undertaking?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 3
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 26 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Key terms
Minimum number of material sustainability matters
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 28 states: ‘A sustainability matter is “material” when it meets the criteria defined
for impact materiality . . . or financial materiality . . . or both.’
IG 1 Materiality assessment paragraph 1 states: ‘The ESRS sustainability statement shall include
relevant and faithful information about all impacts, risks and opportunities (also referred to as
IROs) across environmental, social and governance matters determined to be material from the
impact materiality perspective, the financial materiality perspective or both. The materiality
assessment is the process by which the undertaking determines material information on
sustainability IROs. This is achieved by the determination of material matters and material
information to be reported. The performance of a materiality assessment based on objective
criteria is pivotal to sustainability reporting. The undertaking will use judgement when applying
the criteria, and the related explanations are expected to provide transparency from the
undertaking to the users of the sustainability statement.’
The Application Requirements in Appendix A of ESRS include a list of sustainability matters
covered in ESRS.
Answer
There is no minimum (or maximum) number of material sustainability matters required by ESRS,
as materiality is based on the undertaking’s specific facts and circumstances.
Materiality is a principles-based concept. IG 1 Materiality assessment provides non-authoritative
guidance on how to conduct the materiality assessment. Materiality of a sustainability matter for
an undertaking depends on the specific facts and circumstances related to its strategy, business
model, own operations and value chain. Based on those specific facts and circumstances, a
number of material impacts, risks and opportunities will be identified as a result of the materiality
assessment.
Question ID 172 – Materiality assessment – private equity structures
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Which material sustainability matters must be identified and assessed in private equity structures
having general and limited partners?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapters 5.1 Reporting undertaking and value chain and 7.6 Consolidated reporting and
subsidiary exemption
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 27 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Key terms
Materiality assessment; private equity structures; general and limited partner
Background
Private equity (PE) structures usually have a general partner (GP) and limited partners (LPs). GP
refers to the PE firm that manages a private equity fund. These funds are usually set up as general
partnerships with the third-party investors being the limited partners and the PE firm acting as
the GP. In addition to raising the funds and administering the daily operations of the fund, the GP
is responsible for identifying and closing on investments in portfolio companies of the private
equity fund, assisting the portfolio company management teams in maximising value and
liquidating investments so distributions can be made from the partnership to the LPs. LPs are the
ones who have arranged and invested the capital for the private equity fund but who are not
really concerned about the daily maintenance of the fund, whereas GPs are investment
professionals who are vested with the responsibility of making decisions with respect to the
investments.
To answer the question above, it is assumed that neither the GP nor the LPs consolidate the
portfolio company in their respective financial statements as neither of them financially control
the portfolio company.
ESRS 1 paragraph 62: ‘The sustainability statement shall be for the same reporting undertaking
as the financial statements.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 63: ‘The information about the reporting undertaking provided in the
sustainability statement shall be extended to include information on the material impacts, risks
and opportunities connected with the undertaking through its direct and indirect business
relationships in the upstream and/or downstream value chain (“value chain information”). …’
Answer
General and limited partners of private equity structures must identify and assess material
sustainability matters in their own operations and in their value chain.
If neither the general partner nor the limited partner/s consolidate the portfolio company/ies in
their respective financial statements because neither of them exercises financial control over the
portfolio company/ies, then impacts, risks and opportunities of the portfolio company/ies are not
part of the own operations of the general partner nor of the limited partner/s for the purposes
of the sustainability statement (Reference is made to IG 2 Value chain chapter 2.3 From own
operations to value chain).
The general partner typically provides management services to the portfolio company/ies
through the private equity fund. Therefore, in the absence also of financial control, the portfolio
company/ies are considered business relationships in the general partner’s value chain.
Accordingly, the general partner shall identify and assess material impacts, risks and
opportunities connected to the portfolio company in its downstream value chain.
The limited partner typically provides funds for its investments in portfolio companies. Please
refer to IG 2 Value Chain: FAQ 2: Are financial assets (loans, equity, and debt instruments)
considered business relationships that trigger value chain information?
To note: More detailed guidance is expected in future sector standards. ID 285 Asset managers,
investment entities, scope of sustainability statement deals with a question about the scope of
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 28 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
the sustainability statement assuming that the portfolio company is controlled by the asset
manager / the holding company.
Question ID 185 – Objective evidence and stakeholders’ opinion
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
When assessing the materiality of a sustainability matter, is the focus on stakeholder opinions or
on objective evidence?
ESRS reference
IG 1 Materiality assessment chapter 3.5 Role and approach to stakeholders in the materiality
assessment process; FAQ 10 Should the assessment of IROs rely on quantitative information?; FAQ
15 Do the ESRS mandate to actively engage in dialogue with affected stakeholders for the
materiality assessment process?; and FAQ 16 Can the undertaking prioritise some categories of
stakeholders for the materiality assessment process? How?
Key terms
Materiality assessment; stakeholder opinion; objective evidence
Background
[To note: To better address the issue mentioned by the submitter, it was agreed to change the
question that was received from ‘When evaluating sustainability matters, is the focus on
stakeholder opinions or on objective evidence?’ to the question above.]
ESRS 1 paragraph 24 states: ‘Engagement with affected stakeholders is central to the
undertaking’s ongoing due diligence process … and sustainability materiality assessment.’
IG 1 Materiality assessment - FAQ 10 Should the assessment of IROs rely on quantitative
information? (paragraphs 180 to 183) states:
‘180. Where possible, yes, as quantitative measures of IROs are objective evidence of their
materiality. The emphasis on objective and quantitative information does not mean to
imply that the information from affected stakeholders should be disregarded.
181. The level of comfort sought by the undertaking from quantitative information depends on
whether there is scientific validated data and on consensus reached on the given impact.
For example, global reports or industry information on a given topic, such as negative
impacts on biodiversity loss, could provide the quantitative information needed without
the need for the undertaking to incur in additional research or data collection costs.
182. Quantitative information is not always available or may result in additional costs.
Whenever a qualitative analysis is sufficient for the undertaking to reasonably conclude
that a matter is “not material” or is “material”, additional quantitative information would
not add value to the materiality assessment. As the materiality assessment process evolves
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 29 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
over time, the undertaking may redefine the balance between qualitative or quantitative
information.
183. Quantitative information would, however, be of interest where a topic is on the edge of
being material/non-material based on qualitative information and/or where there are
diverse views. In that case, quantification could corroborate the conclusion.’
IG 1 Materiality assessment FAQ 15 Do the ESRS mandate to actively engage in dialogue with
affected stakeholders for the materiality assessment process? states: ‘The ESRS require disclosure
on the materiality assessment and its outcomes but do not mandate specific behaviour on
stakeholder engagement or the due diligence process.’
IG 1 Materiality assessment FAQ 16 Can the undertaking prioritise some categories of
stakeholders for the materiality assessment process? How? states: ‘Engagement with affected
stakeholders helps the undertaking to understand which sustainability matters are sources of
concern for the respective stakeholders and how they are affected. This information may be
useful input for the assessment.’
Answer
When assessing the materiality of a sustainability matter, there is no conflict between
consideration of views of affected stakeholders and objective evidence. The purpose of both is to
get an understanding of the severity (and likelihood) of impacts to present them faithfully in the
sustainability statement. Depending on the circumstances, this may or may not require
engagement with affected stakeholders.
The materiality analysis should be driven as much as possible by objective data and evidence.
Scientific evidence is the focus in some cases depending on the type of topic and availability of
such evidence. Quantitative/scientific data on the impact may or may not also be available.
Widespread/systemic impacts often tend to be well documented, and there is often a consensus
on their severity.
In other cases, depending on the topic the views of affected stakeholders are a source of
supporting evidence for impact materiality. However, not all stakeholder opinions are equally
relevant for the materiality analysis. Relevance depends on how much the stakeholders are
affected (severity – and likelihood – of impacts). Understanding entity-specific impacts and/or the
manifestation of widespread/systemic impacts in particular contexts and situations requires
more careful consideration of specific circumstances, including whether and how people or the
environment are affected.
Elements useful to address this question can be found in IG 1 Materiality assessment chapters 3.5
Role and approach to stakeholders in the materiality assessment process and 5.4 FAQ on
stakeholder engagement – impact materiality.
Question ID 461 - Sustainability statement – ESRS 1 flowchart E and
disclosure of transition plans
Release date
May 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 30 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Question asked
Why in the Flowchart in Appendix E of ESRS 1 are transition plans mentioned together with
policies, actions and targets?
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 paragraphs 62 and 72; and Appendix E: Flowchart for determining disclosures under ESRS;
ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-1: Disclosure Requirements related to climate change
transition plan
(Note: the disclosure of the transition plan related to biodiversity is voluntary (ESRS E4 Disclosure
Requirement E4-1); as such it is not in the scope of this explanation).
Key terms
Disclosure of transition plans, minimum disclosure requirements, ESRS 1 Appendix E
Background
[The question received: ‘What is the logic according to Flowchart E of ESRS 1 for determining
Disclosure Requirements for transition plans and processes?’ has been reworded to the above to
be clearer.]
ESRS 1 Appendix E – Flowchart for determining disclosures under ESRS presents the reasoning to
determine disclosures when a topic covered by a topical standard is material. In such case, the
related policies, actions and targets shall be disclosed, or it shall be stated that the undertaking
does not have policies, actions and/or targets related to the material sustainability matter. The
undertaking may report a timeframe in which it aims to have these in place (ESRS 1 paragraph 33).
ESRS 1 Appendix E – Flowchart for determining disclosures under ESRS states: ‘… Disclosure
Requirements in relation to action plans, targets, policies, scenario analysis and transition plans
are proportionate because they are contingent on the undertaking having these, …’
ESRS 1 Appendix E – Flowchart for determining disclosures under ESRS does not include
information on the Disclosure Requirements related to transitions plans (E1-1 and E4-1). It does
not include, either, information on the Disclosure Requirements related to the processes in the
ESRS S1 to S4: Processes for engaging with stakeholders about impacts (S1-2, S2-2, S3-2 and S4-2)
and processes to remediate negative impacts and channels for stakeholders to raise concerns (S1-
3, S2-3, S3-3 and S4-3).
ESRS E1-1 paragraph 17 states: ‘In case the undertaking does not have a transition plan in place,
it shall indicate whether and, if so, when it will adopt a transition plan.’
The Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms defines ‘Actions’ as: ‘Actions refer to (i) actions and
action plans (including transition plans) that are undertaken to ensure that the undertaking
delivers against targets set and through which the undertaking seeks to address material impacts,
risks and opportunities; and (ii) decisions to support these with financial, human or technological
resources.’
The Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms defines ‘Transition plan’ as: ‘A specific type of action
plan that is adopted by the undertaking in relation to a strategic decision and that addresses:
(a) a public policy objective; and/or
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 31 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
(b) an entity-specific action plan organised as a structured set of targets and actions, associated
with a key strategic decision, a major change in business model, and/or particularly important
actions and allocated resources.’
Answer
The flowchart in Appendix E of ESRS 1 provides an illustration of the provisions in ESRS on
materiality.
The Flowchart refers to actions (as well as policies and targets) which by definition also comprises
transition plans.
Transition plans are an area of disclosure that have characteristics in common with policies,
targets, and actions. Climate transition plans for example are effectively action plans to achieve
the targets for carbon emissions.
Question ID 821 – Risk and opportunity for financial materiality
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Regarding financial materiality, there are matters that trigger exposure to risks or opportunities
only and others that trigger the exposure to both. In the case of a matter that triggers exposure
to both risks and opportunities, should the assessment of materiality be made on each
individually or is it on the combined financial risk and opportunity?
In addition to the question asked, the submitter provided the following background to the
question: ‘For example, if we take energy as a topic, energy consumption is a financial risk
because the cost of energy can fluctuate significantly. But there is also an opportunity in terms of
reduced energy costs if the company invests in renewable energy and energy-efficient appliances.
In this case, should the financial risk be assessed separately from the financial opportunity? Or
should there be some assessment of what would weigh stronger in the balance, risk or
opportunity and assess accordingly?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 3.5 Financial materiality paragraphs 49 to 51 and AR 14 to 15
Key terms
Financial materiality; sustainability matters generating sustainability risks or opportunities
Background
ESRS 1 paragraphs 49 to 51 state:
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 32 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
‘49. A sustainability matter is material from a financial perspective if it triggers or could
reasonably be expected to trigger material financial effects on the undertaking. This is the
case when a sustainability matter generates risks or opportunities that have a material
influence or that could reasonably be expected to have a material influence on the
undertaking’s development, financial position, financial performance, cash flows, access to
finance or cost of capital over the short-, medium- or long-term. Risks and opportunities
may derive from past events or future events. The financial materiality of a sustainability
matter is not constrained to matters that are within the control of the undertaking but
includes information on material risks and opportunities attributable to business
relationships beyond the scope of consolidation used in the preparation of financial
statements.
50. Dependencies on natural, human and social resources can be sources of financial risks or
opportunities. Dependencies may trigger effects in two possible ways:
(a) they may influence the undertaking’s ability to continue to use or obtain the
resources needed in its business processes as well as the quality and pricing of those
resources; and
(b) they may affect the undertaking’s ability to rely on relationships needed in its
business processes on acceptable terms.
51. The materiality of risks and opportunities is assessed based on a combination of the
likelihood of occurrence and the potential magnitude of the financial effects.’
Regarding sustainability-related risks or opportunities, ESRS 1 paragraph AR 14 states: ‘The
identification of risks and opportunities that affect or could reasonably be expected to affect the
undertaking’s financial position, financial performance, cash flows, access to finance or cost of
capital over the short-, medium- or long-term is the starting point for financial materiality
assessment. In this context, the undertaking shall consider: …
(b) their classification as sources of:
i. risks (contributing to negative deviation in future expected cash inflows or increase in
deviation in future expected cash outflows and/or negative deviation from an
expected change in capitals not recognised in the financial statements); or
ii. opportunities (contributing to positive deviation in future expected cash inflows or
decrease in deviation in future cash outflows and/or positive deviation from expected
change in capitals not recognised in financial statements).’
ESRS 1 paragraph AR 15 states: ‘Once the undertaking has identified its risks and opportunities, it
shall determine which of them are material for reporting. This shall be based on a combination of
(i) the likelihood of occurrence and (ii) the potential magnitude of financial effects determined on
the basis of appropriate thresholds. In this step it shall consider the contribution of those risks
and opportunities to financial effects in the short-, medium- and long-term based on:
(a) scenarios /forecasts that are deemed likely to materialise; and
(b) potential financial effects related to sustainability matters deriving either from situations
with a below the “more likely than not” threshold or assets/liabilities not, or not yet,
reflected in financial statements. This includes:
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 33 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
i. potential situations that following the occurrence of future events may affect cash
flow generation potential;
ii. capitals that are not recognised as assets from an accounting and financial
reporting perspective but have a significant influence on financial performance,
such as natural, intellectual (organisational), human, social and relationship
capitals; and
iii. possible future events that may have an influence on the evolution of such
capitals.’
Answer
When the nature of an opportunity or a risk relating to a sustainability matter is different, it shall
be assessed separately.
In the example provided, the submitter states that energy consumption is a source of (financial)
risk because the cost of energy can fluctuate significantly (upside and downside price risk).
However, he has also identified an investment opportunity in terms of reduced energy costs in
the case that the company invests in renewable energy and energy-efficient appliances.
In financial terms, an undertaking that is more exposed to a risk (higher prices for supplies, lower
prices for sold products) than expected is also exposed to positive deviations when prices for
supplies /sold products will be below /above expectations. The positive deviations are not
necessarily identified as separate opportunities but assessed together with the risk. In the
example above, it is the action of investing in renewable energy that creates the opportunity to
reduce energy expenses.
Supporting material
IFRS S1 General Requirements for Disclosure of Sustainability-related Financial Information also
stresses regarding (financial) materiality in paragraph B15 the importance of expectations in the
materiality assessment: ‘The decisions described in paragraph B14 [i.e. decisions of primary users
related to providing resources to the entity] depend on primary users’ expectations about
returns, for example, dividends, principal and interest payments or market price increases. Those
expectations depend on primary users’ assessment of the amount, timing and uncertainty of
future net cash inflows to the entity and on their assessment of the stewardship of the entity’s
economic resources by the entity’s management and its governing body/bodies or individual(s).’
ESRS 1 chapter 5 Value chain iQuestion ID 41 - Financial institutions – scope
of reporting boundaryiRelease date
May 2024
Question asked
What is the scope of own operations for an insurance company under ESRS? Is it the same as
under Solvency II, i.e. do the ESRS standards relate only to insurers’ non-life insurance activities
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 34 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
(fire, health, damage to vehicles, third part liability, assistance, legal expenses etc.), or also to
investment activities? How should the sustainability report address Insurance with profit
participation?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1, chapter 5.1, paragraphs 62 and 63.
Key terms
Insurance companies, financial Institutions, own operations, investment activities, reporting
boundary
Background
Articles 19a (3) and 29a (3) of the Accounting Directive (Directive 2013/34/EU) require that
reported information relates to the undertaking’s own operations and its upstream and
downstream value chain.
ESRS do not define an undertaking’s ‘own operations.’
ESRS paragraph 62 states that: ‘The sustainability statement shall be for the same reporting
undertaking as the financial statements. For example, if the reporting undertaking is a parent
company required to prepare consolidated financial statements, the sustainability statement will
be for the group. This requirement does not apply where the reporting undertaking is not required
to draw-up financial statements or where the reporting undertaking is preparing consolidated
sustainability reporting pursuant to Article 48i of Directive 2013/34/EU.’
ESRS paragraph 63 states that: ‘The information about the reporting undertaking provided in
the sustainability statement shall be extended to include information on the material impacts,
risks and opportunities connected with the undertaking through its direct and indirect business
relationships in the upstream and/or downstream value chain (“value chain information”). In
extending the information about the reporting undertaking, the undertaking shall include
material impacts, risks and opportunities connected with its upstream and downstream value
chain:
(a) following the outcome of its due diligence process and of its materiality assessment; and
(b) in accordance with any specific requirements related to the value chain in other ESRS.’
Answer
ESRS 1 paragraph 62 clarifies that the sustainability statement shall be prepared for the same
reporting undertaking as the financial statements. Therefore, the scope of own operations for an
insurance company is guided by the financial reporting requirements, which reflect the business
model, and is not necessarily the same as under Solvency II. Reference is made also to IG 2 Value
chain chapter 2.3).
Following the definition of business relationship in Annex 2 of the ESRS Delegated Act, the
investments (including those related to insurances with profit participation) fall under the scope
of an undertaking’s business relationships. Therefore, investments are considered part of the
value chain and are subject to consideration in the materiality assessment of impacts, risks and
opportunities as established in ESRS 1 paragraph 63. Also refer to IG 2 Value chain FAQ 2. When
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 35 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
the undertaking has identified material impacts, risks or opportunities that are connected to an
investment business relationship, it must disclose them (ESRS 1 chapter 5 Value chain).
Regarding investment activities, the sector-agnostic ESRS do not provide Disclosure Requirements
concerning specific metrics apart from GHG Scope 3. For GHG Scope 3, Category 15 (Investments)
is to be provided, if it is determined to be a significant category in accordance with ESRS E1
paragraphs 44 (c), AR 39 (a), AR 46 and AR 48.
EFRAG expects to add more guidance on these aspects in the forthcoming sector ESRS.
Question ID 148 - Scope of consolidation for non-EU and
unconsolidated subsidiaries
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Shall the (consolidated) sustainability statement of a parent company include all its subsidiaries
even if some of them:
(a) are located outside of the EU; and/or
(b) if some are not consolidated for financial statements purposes?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraph 62
Key terms
Non-EU subsidiaries, non-consolidated subsidiaries
Background
[The following question was received: ‘Does the (consolidated) sustainability statement of a
parent company have to include all its subsidiaries even if some of them are located outside of
the EU and/or if some are not (financially/legally) consolidated?’ and changed it to the above for
clarity.]
ESRS 1 paragraph 62 states: ‘The sustainability statement shall be for the same reporting
undertaking as the financial statements. For example, if the reporting undertaking is a parent
company required to prepare consolidated financial statements, the sustainability statement will
be for the group.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 90 states: ‘Data and assumptions used in preparing the sustainability statement
shall be consistent to the extent possible with the corresponding financial data and assumptions
used in the undertaking’s financial statements.’
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 36 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS 1 paragraph 102 states: ‘When the undertaking is reporting at a consolidated level, it shall
perform its assessment of material impacts, risks and opportunities for the entire consolidated
group regardless of its group legal structure.’
The scope of consolidation of financial statements for undertakings organised as a group is
determined by either IFRS or national accounting laws, considering the requirements of the
Accounting Directive (Directive 2013/34/EU, specifically Article 21). Exemptions from the
consolidation of subsidiaries in the financial statements are provided under Article 23 (9) and (10)
of the Accounting Directive.
In addition to these provisions in practise subsidiaries sometimes may not be included in the
financial consolidation, based on materiality considerations, even though the legal obligation to
consolidate them exists.
Answer
The starting point of the sustainability statement is the perimeter used for financial reporting.
The consolidated sustainability statement of a parent company must include all its subsidiaries in
line with the scope of consolidation in financial reporting, even if some of them are located
outside of the EU.
The undertaking performs its assessment of material impacts, risks and opportunities based on
the business model for the entire consolidated group. Subsidiaries that are immaterial for financial
statements and therefore are excluded from the consolidated perimeter when preparing financial
statements on an exceptional basis for practical considerations, or in line with national accounting
law from, may still be material from a double materiality point of view. When this happens, they
shall be included in the reporting boundaries of the consolidated sustainability statement, despite
them being deemed immaterial for the consolidated financial statements.
See also IG 1 Materiality assessment FAQ 22: Is a multi-sector group required to include metrics
for the entire group or only data related to the material IRO?
Question ID 217 - Prudential consolidation
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Should an undertaking prepare its ESRS consolidated sustainability statement following the
requirements relating to prudential consolidation laid down in Part One, Title II, chapter 2 of the
Capital Requirements Regulation (EU) 575/2013?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraph 62
Key Terms
Prudential consolidation
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 37 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 62 states: ‘The sustainability statement shall be for the same reporting
undertaking as the financial statements. For example, if the reporting undertaking is a parent
company required to prepare consolidated financial statements, the sustainability statement will
be for the group.’
In its answer to ID 2013-310 for Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (CRR), the European Banking
Authority states the following:
‘Article 18 (1) of Regulation (EU) No. 575/2013 (CRR) requires institutions to carry out a full
consolidation of all institutions and financial institutions which are its subsidiaries for the
application of prudential requirements on a consolidated basis.
Undertakings, other than institutions and financial institutions which neither acquire holdings nor
pursue any of the activities listed in points 2 to 12 and point 15 of Annex I to Directive 2013/36/EU
(CRD), are excluded from the scope of prudential consolidation irrespective of whether or not
these undertakings are directly or indirectly held by the parent entity. As a result:
(a) Non-financial subsidiaries are excluded from the scope of prudential consolidation
regardless of whether these subsidiaries are fully held by a holding company. On the other
hand, the holding company is included for prudential consolidation purposes;
(b) Conversely, any holding company needs consolidating even when it holds no participation
in a financial subsidiary. However, all its participations are excluded for prudential
consolidation purposes.’
Answer
In accordance with ESRS 1 paragraph 62, sustainability statements shall be prepared for the
consolidated group; therefore, they shall not be grounded in a consolidation based on prudential
requirements. The reported information shall meet the qualitative characteristics of information
and the requirements in ESRS 1 paragraphs 54, 57 on level of disaggregation: on this basis, if
applicable and helpful to produce more understandable and relevant reporting, the undertaking
could disaggregate the reported disclosures between those related to the scope of financial
consolidation and those related to the scope of prudential consolidation. This is particularly
relevant if the undertaking uses the option to incorporate by reference information presented in
its Pillar 3 reports (ESRS 1 paragraphs 119/122).
ESRS 1 chapter 6 Time horizons
Question ID 180 - Time horizon: impact versus financial materiality
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
Is there a difference between the time horizon as defined in ESRS 1 for impact materiality and for
financial materiality?
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 38 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 6.4 Definition of short-, medium- and long-term for reporting purposes
Key terms
Financial materiality; impact materiality; time horizon
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 77 states: ‘When preparing its sustainability statement, the undertaking shall
adopt the following time intervals as of the end of the reporting period:
(a) for the short-term time horizon: the period adopted by the undertaking as the reporting
period in its financial statements;
(b) for the medium-term time horizon: from the end of the short-term reporting period defined
in (a) up to five years; and
(c) for the long-term time horizon: more than five years.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 80 states: ‘There may be circumstances where the use of the medium- or long-
term time horizons defined in paragraph 77 results in non-relevant information, as the
undertaking uses a different definition for (i) its processes of identification and management of
material impacts, risks and opportunities or (ii) the definition of its actions and setting targets.
These circumstances may be due to industry-specific characteristics, such as cash flow and
business cycles, the expected duration of capital investments, the time horizons over which the
users of sustainability statements conduct their assessments or the planning horizons typically
used in the undertaking’s industry for decision-making. In these circumstances, the undertaking
may adopt a different definition of medium- and/or long-term time horizons (see ESRS 2 BP-2,
paragraph 9).’
ESRS 1 Basis of Conclusions paragraph 124 states: ‘The SRB discussed whether to prescribe
mandatory time horizons for short-, medium- and long-term for reporting purposes or whether
they should be entity-specific based on its business model, industry-characteristics, and its
planning horizon. Feedback from public consultation in that respect was ambiguous. Preparers
generally preferred an entity-specific approach to be able to use already existing data consistent
with their managerial processes, whereas users a more standardized approach for better
comparability across undertakings. Noticing that many of the forthcoming first-time sustainability
reporters need guidance, to increase comparability the SRB decided to prescribe conventional
time periods but to allow deviations from the medium- and long- term time horizons based on
entity-specific circumstances, acknowledging also that – depending on the sustainability matter
and sector concerned – other time horizons within the long-term horizon might be useful and
therefore prevail at topical level.’
Answer
Time horizons are defined in ESRS 1 chapter 6.4, setting fixed time horizons for the short-,
medium- and long-term with no distinction being made between impact and financial materiality.
However, ESRS 1 paragraph 80 acknowledges that there may be circumstances in which the
undertaking uses a different definition of its time horizons compared to the fixed time horizons
set in ESRS 1 paragraph 77. This exception to the general rule has been granted to take into
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 39 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
account entity-specific circumstances to manage sustainability-related impacts, risks and
opportunities.
When applying either the predefined time horizons or when the exception is used and as a result
another entity-specific time horizon is used instead of the predefined time horizon, potential or
actual impacts may have a different time horizon than risks or opportunities arising from the same
sustainability matter (and their related financial effects). Similarly, actions put in place to address
impacts may have a different time horizon than actions put in place to address risks or
opportunities. Transparency about time horizons is required in connection with impacts and
anticipated financial effects, as stated in ESRS 2 SBM-3 paragraph 48 (c) and (e).
Question ID 286 - Financial year different from calendar year
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Is it possible to report some metrics on a (deviating) financial year and other metrics on a calendar
year basis? For example, if the financial year is from 1 July to 30 June, can the reporting of the
energy consumption in metrics be based on the energy bill on a calendar year basis (i.e. from 1
January to 31 December) rather than the financial year?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapters 2; 1 chapter 6.1; and 7.2; ESRS 2 BP-2 – Disclosures in relation to specific
circumstances (paragraphs 6 and 8)
Key terms
Financial year, calendar year, metrics
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 73 states: ‘The reporting period for the undertaking’s sustainability statement
shall be consistent with that of its financial statements.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 90 states: ‘Data and assumptions used in preparing the sustainability statement
shall be consistent to the extent possible with the corresponding financial data and assumptions
used in the undertaking’s financial statements.’
When making estimates, the qualitative characteristics of information shall be considered (see
ESRS 1 chapter 2 and Appendix B). Faithful representation requires information to be (i) complete,
(ii) neutral and (iii) accurate. Information can be accurate without being perfectly precise in all
respects. Accurate information implies that the undertaking has implemented adequate
processes and internal controls to avoid material errors or material misstatements. As such,
estimates shall be presented with a clear emphasis on their possible limitations and associated
uncertainty.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 40 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS 1 paragraph 88 states: ‘An undertaking shall disclose information to enable users to
understand the most significant uncertainties affecting the quantitative metrics and monetary
amounts reported in its sustainability statement.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 69 states: ‘There are circumstances where the undertaking cannot collect the
information about its upstream and downstream value chain as required by paragraph 63 after
making reasonable efforts to do so. In these circumstances, the undertaking shall estimate the
information to be reported about its upstream and downstream value chain by using all
reasonable and supportable information, such as sector-average data and other proxies.’
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 42 states with respect to Disclosure Requirements E1-6 - Gross Scopes 1, 2,
3, and Total GHG emissions: ‘An undertaking might have a different reporting period from some
or all of the entities in its value chain. In such circumstances, the undertaking is permitted to
measure its GHG emissions in accordance with paragraph 44 using information for reporting
periods that are different from its own reporting period if that information is obtained from
entities in its value chain with reporting periods that are different from the undertaking’s
reporting period, on the condition that:
(a) the undertaking uses the most recent data available from those entities in its value chain to
measure and disclose its greenhouse gas emissions;
(b) the length of the reporting periods is the same; and
(c) the undertaking discloses the effects of significant events and changes in circumstances
(relevant to its GHG emissions) that occur between the reporting dates of the entities in its
value chain and the date of the undertaking’s general purpose financial statements.’
Answer
No, it is not possible to report metrics for a period which deviates from the financial year.
The reporting period for the undertaking’s sustainability statement shall be consistent with that
of its financial statements. Accordingly, the undertaking shall use consistent assumptions adopted
in the preparation of the financial statements for all metrics.
When reporting for a financial year from 1 July to 30 June, an undertaking starting for example
from the calendar year energy bill as a basis to calculate the energy consumption, shall make
appropriate adjustments to the data when this is necessary to properly depict the effective usage
during the period running from 1 July to 30 June.
There are special provisions for ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6 dealing with situations
where an undertaking has a different reporting period from some or all of the entities in its value
chain.
ESRS 1 chapter 7 preparation and presentation of sustainability information
Question ID 552 – Comparative information
Release date
May 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 41 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Question asked
Does the company need to report data from previous years?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapters 7.1, 10.3 and 6.3
Key terms
Comparative information; base year
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 83 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose comparative information in respect
of the previous period for all quantitative metrics and monetary amounts disclosed in the current
period. When relevant to an understanding of the current period’s sustainability statement, the
undertaking shall also disclose comparative information for narrative disclosures.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 85 states: ‘Sometimes it is impracticable to adjust comparative information for
one or more prior periods to achieve comparability with the current period. For example, data
might not have been collected in the prior period(s) in a way that allows for either retrospective
application of a new definition of a metric or target or retrospective restatement to correct a prior
period error and it may be impracticable to recreate the information (see ESRS 2 BP-2). When it
is impracticable to adjust comparative information for one or more prior periods, the undertaking
shall disclose this fact.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 86 states: ‘When an ESRS requires the undertaking to present more than one
comparative period for a metric or datapoint, the requirements of that ESRS shall prevail.’
Some requirements (i.e., targets) provide the disclosure of the base year (see chapter 6.3 of ESRS
1), defined as the historical reference date or period for which information is available and against
which subsequent information can be compared over time. In this context, comparative
information is required in respect of the base year for amounts reported in the current period
when reporting the developments and progress towards a target unless the relevant Disclosure
Requirement already defines how to report on progress.
ESRS 1 paragraph 136 states: ‘To ease the first-time application of this Standard, the undertaking
is not required to disclose the comparative information required by section 7.1 Presenting
comparative information in the first year of preparation of the sustainability statement under the
ESRS.’
Answer
Yes, the undertaking shall always report comparative information in respect of the previous
period for all quantitative metrics and monetary amounts disclosed in the current period.
Narrative disclosures shall only be disclosed for previous periods when relevant to an
understanding of the current period’s sustainability statement.
Special provisions apply when it is impracticable to disclose comparative information (ESRS 1
paragraph 85).
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 42 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Some requirements (e.g., targets) request the disclosure of the base year when reporting on
progress towards a target. Comparative information is required in respect of the base year for
amounts reported in the current period when reporting the developments and progress towards
a target (ESRS 1 chapter 6.3).
A phase-in provision exists exempting undertakings for the first year of preparation of the
sustainability statement to provide comparative information (ESRS 1 paragraph 136).
ESRS 1 chapter 8 Structure of sustainability statement
Question ID 38 - Structure of the sustainability statement
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Separating HR policies (ESRS S1-1), action plans (ESRS S1-4), targets (ESRS S1-5) and metrics (ESRS
S1-9 to S1-17) is not efficient for the understanding of users. Can we put into one chapter, for each
material issue (e.g., health and safety), the policy with the targets, the action plan, and the
metrics?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1 paragraph 11, ESRS 1 chapter 8, ESRS 1 Appendix F
Key Terms
Structure of the sustainability statement
Background
ESRS 1 chapter 8 provides the basis for the presentation of information about sustainability
matters prepared in compliance with Articles 19a and 29a of Directive 2013/34/EU (i.e., the
sustainability statement) within the undertaking’s management report.
ESRS 2 paragraph 49 states: ‘The undertaking may disclose the descriptive information required
in paragraph 46 – ESRS 2 SBM-3 – alongside the disclosures provided under the corresponding
topical ESRS, in which case it shall still present a statement of its material impacts, risks and
opportunities alongside its disclosures prepared under this chapter of ESRS 2.’
ESRS S1 paragraph 11 specifies that the ESRS 2 General disclosures in topical standards shall be
presented alongside the disclosures required by ESRS 2 except for ESRS 2 SBM-3 Material impacts,
risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and business model, for which the
undertaking has an option to present the disclosures alongside the topical disclosures.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 43 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Answer
In relation to the presentation of information required by a topical standard, flexibility is provided
to the undertaking as there are no specific requirements defining how an undertaking shall
present the reported information related to a specific topic required by a given topical standard.
Therefore, for a given material matter (for example, health and safety) the undertaking may
present the applicable disclosures on policies, actions, targets and metrics all together and does
not have to follow the structure of the disclosure requirements within the topical standard, such
as ESRS S1 Own workforce.
Regarding the overall sustainability reporting, ESRS 1 paragraph 115 clarifies that the sustainability
statement must be structured in four parts: ‘general information, environmental information,
social information and governance information’. A particular treatment is anticipated for ESRS 2
SBM-3 related disclosures1 required by topical standards, which can be either presented alongside
the other ESRS 2 General disclosures or alongside the respective topical disclosures
(environmental, social and governance). In case the ESRS 2 General disclosures required by topical
standards are presented alongside other topical disclosures, the undertaking still has to present a
statement of its material impacts, risks and opportunities alongside its disclosures prepared under
ESRS 2 SBM-3. Appendix F of ESRS 1 provides a non-binding structure for a sustainability
statement.
Question ID 296 – Location of ESRS 2-related Disclosure
Requirements in topical standards
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Do the ESRS 2-related Disclosure Requirements in topical standards have to be reported in the
general section of the sustainability statement or in the respective topical section?
ESRS reference
All topical ESRS
Key terms
ESRS 2-related Disclosure Requirements in topical standards
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 115 states: ‘The undertaking shall structure its sustainability statement in four
parts in the following order: general information, environmental information (including
disclosures pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852), social information and governance
1 This ID received an editorial update in July 2024: The previous reference ‘ESRS 2 General
Disclosures’ has been changed to ‘ESRS 2 SBM-3 related disclosures’.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 44 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
information. Respecting the provision in section 3.6 Material impacts or risks arising from actions
to address sustainability matters of this Standard, when information provided in one part contains
information to be reported in another part, the undertaking may refer in one part to information
presented in another part, avoiding duplications.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 49 states: ‘The undertaking may disclose the descriptive information required
in paragraph 46 (reference to ESRS 2 SBM-3 Disclosure Requirement) alongside the disclosures
provided under the corresponding topical ESRS, in which case it shall still present a statement of
its material impacts, risks and opportunities alongside its disclosures prepared under this chapter
of ESRS 2.’
ESRS 2-related disclosures in topical standards are identified by reference to ESRS 2 Disclosure
Requirements as follows: ‘Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 GOV-1 … ESRS 2 GOV-3 …
ESRS 2 SBM-2 … ESRS 2 SBM-3 … and … ESRS 2 IRO-1’.
Answer
ESRS 2-related Disclosure Requirements in topical standards must be reported in the general
section of the sustainability statement as they are part of the general disclosures of ESRS 2. They
are presented alongside the relevant ESRS 2 disclosure (e.g., ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement IRO-
1-related).
For the descriptive information required in ESRS 2 paragraph 46 (ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement
SBM-3-related disclosures), there is an option to present them alongside the relevant topical
disclosure if the undertaking elects to follow the option in ESRS 2 paragraph 49.
Question ID 401 - Include quantitative information in qualitative
information
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
When completing the narrative response for the ‘Description of the key products and materials
that come out of the undertaking’s production process’, can the quantitative metrics that are also
required to be disclosed be included (i.e., the total waste generated in mass)? Additionally, can
derivative metrics that are not required but that provide additional detail such as total waste to
revenue or total waste to enterprise value be included in the narrative response?
ESRS reference
ESRS E5 Disclosure Requirement E5-5
Key terms
Quantitative metrics, resource outflows, ESRS E5 Disclosure Requirement E5-5
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 45 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Background
ESRS E5-5 states that an undertaking shall disclose information on its resource inflows, including
waste, related to its material impacts, risks and opportunities.
ESRS 1 paragraph 19 states that: ‘When preparing its sustainability statement, the undertaking
shall apply:
(a) the fundamental qualitative characteristics of information, i.e. relevance and faithful
representation; and
(b) the enhancing qualitative characteristics of information, i.e. comparability, verifiability
and understandability.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 11 states: ‘In addition to the disclosure requirements laid down in the three
categories of ESRS, when an undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not
covered or not covered with sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific
facts and circumstances, it shall provide additional entity-specific disclosures to enable users to
understand the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities . Application
requirements AR 1 to AR 5 provide further guidance regarding entity-specific disclosures.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 73 states: ‘The undertaking shall apply the requirements for the content of
disclosures in this provision when it discloses on the metrics it has in place with regard to each
material sustainability matter.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 75 states that: ‘The undertaking shall disclose any metrics that it uses to
evaluate performance and effectiveness, in relation to a material impact, risk or opportunity.’
Answer
Yes, it is allowed, or even required, on an entity-specific basis following ESRS 1 paragraph 11, to
include quantitative data in the description of resource inflows, and to disclose additional non-
standardised metrics when such quantitative data are needed to enable users to understand the
undertaking’s material sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities. This approach is not
only valid for the disclosures in E5-5 but in general for all the qualitative disclosures in ESRS.
Question ID 426 – Structure of the sustainability statement
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
I wish to know the structure of the sustainability statement that needs to be published in the
management report. While you have provided a structure in ESRS 1 Appendix F, it seems to not
be detailed. Are we meant to follow the exact format as given under each ESRS? Is there a
template that can be provided to effectively disclose information?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 8, ESRS 1 Appendix F
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 46 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Key terms
Structure of ESRS the sustainability statement
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 111 states: ‘Sustainability information shall be presented:
(a) in a way that allows for a distinction between information required by disclosures in ESRS
and other information included in the management report; and
(b) under a structure that facilitates access to and understanding of the sustainability
statement in a format that is both human-readable and machine-readable.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 115 states: ‘The undertaking shall structure its sustainability statement in four
parts in the following order: general information, environmental information (including
disclosures pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852), social information and governance
information. Respecting the provision in section 3.6 Material impacts or risks arising from actions
to address sustainability matters of this Standard, when information provided in one part contains
information to be reported in another part, the undertaking may refer in one part to information
presented in another part, avoiding duplications. The undertaking may apply the detailed
structure illustrated in Appendix F of this Standard.’
Answer
No, there is no requirement in ESRS to follow the exact format as given under each ESRS.
The only ESRS requirement is the following: ‘The undertaking shall structure its sustainability
statement in four parts in the following order: general information, environmental information
(including disclosures pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852), social information and
governance information.’ In addition, the undertaking may consider incorporation by reference
subject to the requirements in ESRS 1 chapter 9.1 Incorporation by reference.
ESRS 1 Appendix F provides an example on how to structure the sustainability statement aligned
with the general requirements under chapter 8 of ESRS 1 without further limiting the flexibility of
the preparers when presenting the related disclosures.
To note:
The structure of the sustainability statement shall meet the qualitative characteristics of
information (see ESRS 1 Appendix B).
The digital ESRS XBRL Taxonomy may help to prepare the sustainability statement in a structured
way. Starting to prepare the mapping of the information to be reported with the digital ESRS XBRL
Taxonomy will facilitate the subsequent tagging of the ESG information required by the machine-
readable format. Therefore, EFRAG encourages to take inspiration from the digital ESRS XBRL
Taxonomy to structure the sustainability disclosures. IG 3 List of ESRS Data Points offers a useful
tool to perform this exercise.
Currently, there is no detailed template for the sustainability statement. EFRAG might consider
providing a template in the future.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 47 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Question ID 762 – Location of policies, actions and targets in the
sustainability report
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
1) In relation to Minimum Disclosure Requirements (MDR) on policies, actions and targets,
shall the undertaking report them:
a) all aggregated in three blocks, each for policies, actions and targets; or
b) disaggregated, i.e. each policy together with the related action(s) and target(s)?
2) What if policies, actions or targets are related to more than one topical standard?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraphs 13, 115 and AR 18; ESRS 1 chapter 3.6 Material impacts or risks arising from
actions to address sustainability matters; ESRS 2 paragraphs 61 and 71
Key terms
Structure of the sustainability statement; policies, actions and targets
Background
The question received, ‘In relation to MDR on policies, actions and targets, should the undertaking
report in each topical standard one or multiple policies, actions and targets? If so, should the
undertaking report topical datapoints related to each policy, action or target in one block or for
each policy?’ was modified to be able to address it more precisely and to add more nuance to the
question.
ESRS 1 paragraph 13 states: ‘The undertaking shall apply the minimum disclosure requirements
regarding policies, actions, metrics and targets together with the corresponding Disclosure
Requirements in topical and sector-specific ESRS.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 115 states: ‘The undertaking shall structure its sustainability statement in four
parts in the following order: general information, environmental information (including
disclosures pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852), social information and governance
information. Respecting the provision in Section 3.6 Material impacts or risks arising from actions
to address sustainability matters of this Standard, when information provided in one part contains
information to be reported in another part, the undertaking may refer in one part to information
presented in another part, avoiding duplications. The undertaking may apply the detailed
structure illustrated in Appendix F of this Standard.’
ESRS 1 paragraph AR 18 states: ‘As an illustration for paragraph 115 in section 8.2 Content and
structure of the sustainability statement of this Standard, the undertaking that covers
environmental and social matters in the same policy may cross-refer. That means that the
undertaking may report on the policy in its environmental disclosures and cross-refer to it from
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 48 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
the relevant social disclosures and vice versa. Consolidated presentation of policies across topics
is allowed.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 61 on MDR on policies and actions states: ‘The corresponding disclosures shall
be located alongside disclosures prescribed by the relevant ESRS. When a single policy or the
same actions address several interconnected sustainability matters, the undertaking may disclose
the required information in its reporting under one topical ESRS and cross-reference to it in its
reporting under other topical ESRS.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 71 on metrics and targets states: ‘The corresponding disclosures shall be
located alongside disclosures prescribed by the topical ESRS.’
ESRS 1 chapter 3.6 paragraphs 52 and 53 state:
‘52. The undertaking’s materiality assessment may lead to the identification of situations
in which its actions to address certain impacts or risks, or to benefit from certain
opportunities in relation to a sustainability matter, might have material negative
impacts or cause material risks in relation to one or more other sustainability
matters. For example:
(a) an action plan to decarbonise production that involves abandoning certain
products might have material negative impacts on the undertaking’s own
workforce and result in material risks due to redundancy payments; or
(b) an action plan of an automotive supplier to focus on the supply of e-vehicles might
lead to stranded assets for the production of supply parts for conventional vehicles.
53. In such situations, the undertaking shall:
(a) disclose the existence of material negative impacts or material risks together with
the actions that generate them, with a cross-reference to the topic to which the
impacts or risks relate; and
(b) provide a description of how the material negative impacts or material risks are
addressed under the topic to which they relate.’
Answer
(1) In relation to Minimum Disclosure Requirements (MDR) on policies, actions and targets,
shall the undertaking report them:
a) all aggregated in three blocks each for policies, actions, and targets; or
b) disaggregated, i.e. each policy together with the related action(s) and
target(s)?
The structure of the sustainability statement shall be presented in four parts as prescribed by
ESRS 1 paragraph 115. The undertaking shall apply the minimum disclosure requirements
regarding policies, actions, metrics and targets together with the corresponding Disclosure
Requirements in topical and sector-specific ESRS (ESRS 1 paragraph 13).
Both alternatives are possible provided that the qualitative characteristics of information (see
ESRS 1 chapter 2) are met. A combination of approach (a) and (b) is also possible. Reference from
one part of the sustainability statement to another is allowed, avoiding duplications (ESRS 1
paragraph 115).
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 49 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
(2) What if policies, actions or targets relate to more than one topical standard?
When a single policy or the same actions address more than one sustainability topic, the
undertaking may disclose the required information in its reporting under one topical ESRS and
cross-reference to it in its reporting under other topical ESRS (see ESRS 1 paragraph 61).
ESRS 2 paragraph 71 requires that metrics and targets be located alongside the disclosures
prescribed by the topical ESRS. ESRS 2 does not specify what to do when the same metric or the
same target covers more than one sustainability topic.
Reference is made to ID 426 Structure of the sustainability statement.
Question ID 906 – Structure of sustainability statement – annex /
appendix possible?
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Is there the possibility to implement an ‘Appendix’ as another part of the sustainability statement
(mainly for the content index, EU datapoint table, etc.)?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 8.2; ESRS 2 paragraphs 56 and 119
Key terms
Structure of the sustainability statement; content index; EU-datapoint table; potential appendix
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 115 states: ‘The undertaking shall structure its sustainability statement in four
parts in the following order: general information, environmental information (including
disclosures pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2020/852), social information and governance
information. Respecting the provision in Section 3.6 Material impacts or risks arising from actions
to address sustainability matters of this Standard, when information provided in one part contains
information to be reported in another part, the undertaking may refer in one part to information
presented in another part, avoiding duplications. The undertaking may apply the detailed
structure illustrated in Appendix F of this Standard.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 56 states: ‘The undertaking shall include a list of the Disclosure Requirements
complied with in preparing the sustainability statement, following the outcome of the materiality
assessment (see ESRS 1 Cchapter 3), including the page numbers and/or paragraphs where the
related disclosures are located in the sustainability statement. This may be presented as a content
index. The undertaking shall also include a table of all the datapoints that derive from other EU
legislation as listed in Appendix B of this standard, indicating where they can be found in the
sustainability statement and including those that the undertaking has assessed as not material,
in which case the undertaking shall indicate “Not material” in the table in accordance with ESRS1
paragraph 35.’
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 50 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS 1 paragraph 119 states: ‘Provided that the conditions in paragraph 120 are met, information
prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement of an ESRS, including a specific datapoint prescribed by a
Disclosure Requirement, may be incorporated in the sustainability statement by reference to:
(a) another section of the management report;
(b) the financial statements;
(c) the corporate governance statement (if not part of the management report) …’
ESRS 1 paragraph 120 states: ‘The undertaking may incorporate information by reference to the
documents, or part of the documents, listed in paragraph 119, provided that the disclosures
incorporated by reference:
(a) constitute a separate element of information and are clearly identified in the document
concerned as addressing the relevant Disclosure Requirement, or the relevant specific
datapoint prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement;
(b) are published before or at the same time as the management report;
(c) are in the same language as the sustainability statement;
(d) are subject to at least the same level of assurance as the sustainability statement; and
(e) meet the same technical digitalisation requirements as the sustainability statement.
Answer
It is possible to have the content index and the EU datapoint table as another section of the
management report.
The sustainability statement shall consist of four parts (ESRS 1 paragraph 56). The first part is
related to general information. As the content index and the datapoints that derive from other
EU legislation are part of the ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement IRO-2 – Disclosure Requirements in
ESRS covered by the undertaking’s sustainability statement, they need to be included in the part
related to general information. However, information can, subject to the incorporation by
reference requirements of ESRS 1 paragraph 120, also be placed in ‘another section of the
management report’ (ESRS 1 paragraph 119 (a)).
Reference is made to ID 628 Content index.
ESRS 1 chapter 9 Linkages with other parts of corporate reporting and
connected information
Question ID 243 - Reference to financial statements
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Can you explain and give more context to the datapoint in ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (f)?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 9; ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (f)
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 51 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Key Terms
Cross-reference to financial statements, ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-6
Background
ESRS S1-6 paragraph 50 (f) requires undertakings to disclose: ‘a cross-reference of the information
reported under (a) above to the most representative number in the financial statements.’
ESRS S1-6 paragraph 50 (a) requests the ‘total number of employees by head count and
breakdowns by gender and by country for countries in which the undertaking has 50 or more
employees representing at least 10% of its total number of employees.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 124 addresses the matter of connectivity with financial statements and states:
‘when the sustainability statement includes monetary amounts or other quantitative datapoints
that exceed a threshold of materiality and that are presented in the financial statements (direct
connectivity between information disclosed in sustainability statements and information
disclosed in financial statements), the undertaking shall include a reference to the relevant
paragraph of its financial statements where the corresponding information can be found.’
Directive 2013/34/EU, Article 16 describes the ‘Content of the notes to the financial statements
relating to all undertakings’ and requires the disclosure of (1)(h) ‘the average number of
employees during the financial year.’
Answer
This datapoint requirement is based on the principle of connectivity between the sustainability
statement and the financial statement, which is described in ESRS 1 chapter 9.2. In paragraphs
124 and 125 of this chapter, a distinction is made between direct connectivity (paragraph 124)
and indirect connectivity (paragraph 125). In both cases, the principle is that monetary or
quantitative amounts that exceed the threshold of materiality shall be cross-referenced from the
sustainability statement to the financial statements; for indirect connectivity, this means
explaining how these amounts relate to the most relevant amounts presented in the financial
statements. Where appropriate, a reconciliation may be provided, and it may be presented in
tabular form.
On this basis, the objective of ESRS 1 S1-6 paragraph 50 (f) is to cross-check the number of
employees required by paragraph 50 (a) against the most appropriate amount disclosed in the
financial statements. This includes the average number of employees during the year, disclosed
according to Article 16 of the Directive 2013/34/EU as transposed into the laws of each EU
Member State, and other relevant data if they are disclosed in the financial statements.
Given that ESRS S1-6 provides some flexibility in terms of methodology for calculating the head
count number of employees (i.e., average or at the end of the year), the undertaking is required
to disclose the methodology used as per paragraph 50 (d)(ii). If an undertaking uses a different
methodology for calculating the head count between the note to the financial statements and this
datapoint in ESRS S1-6 (e.g., average for the former, end of the year for the latter), it shall explain
the difference in the basis for calculation following the principle of connectivity defined in ESRS 1.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 52 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS 1 chapter 10 Transitional provisions
Question ID 204 - Phase-in for first-time large undertakings
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Companies that become ‘large undertakings’ for the first time: do they benefit from the Phase-In
Requirements?
[Note by the EFRAG Secretariat: the only question by the submitter marked as ‘1: explanation’ is
answered here. The submitter also had a second question: ‘Are the ESRS requirements
applicable from the year they exceed the thresholds?’ which is considered to fall outside the
scope of the Q&A platform and will be forwarded to the European Commission.]
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraph 137 and Appendix C: List of phased-in Disclosures Requirements
Key terms
Phase-in requirements, first-time large undertaking
Background
ESRS 1 section 10.4 paragraph 137 states: ‘Appendix C List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements
in this Standard sets phase-in provisions for the Disclosure Requirements or datapoints of
Disclosure Requirements in ESRS that may be omitted or that are not applicable in the first year(s)
of preparation of the sustainability statement under the ESRS.’
In setting phase-ins, ESRS 1 Appendix C uses the wording ‘. . . for the first year (for the first two
years/for the first three years) of preparation of its sustainability statement . . .’
Answer
As stated in ESRS 1 Appendix C, the phase-in requirements apply to the first year, to the first two
years or to the first three years ‘of preparation of its sustainability report’. All undertakings
meeting the criteria of the Accounting Directive (Directive 2013/34/EU) Article 3 of large
undertakings (groups) may benefit from the phase-in requirements listed in ESRS 1 Appendix 1,
including undertakings that become ‘large undertakings’ for the first time.
Question ID 291 - Phase-in 750 employees and topical standards
Release date
May 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 53 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Question asked
Are the ESRS 2 related Disclosure Requirements in topical standards also subject to the one- / two-
year phase-in of ESRS 1 for 750 or less employee undertakings?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 Appendix C: List of phase-in Disclosure Requirements
Key terms
Phase-in less than 750 employees, ESRS 2 related disclosures in topical standards
Background
For the topical standards of ESRS E4, S1, S2, S3 and S4, ESRS 1 Appendix C has the following phase-
in provision for all disclosure requirements of the respective ESRS:
‘Undertakings or groups not exceeding on their balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year (on a consolidated basis where applicable) may omit the
information specified in the disclosure requirements of ESRS (reference of the standard, see
above) for the first two years (for ESRS S1, “first year”) of preparation of their sustainability
statement.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 2 states: ‘In the preparation of disclosures under this Standard, the undertaking
shall apply the Disclosure Requirements (including their datapoints) set in topical ESRS, as listed
in Appendix C of this Standard Disclosure/Application Requirements in topical ESRS that are
applicable jointly with ESRS 2 General Disclosures. The undertaking shall apply the requirements
listed in Appendix C: (a) in all instances for the requirements in topical standards related to
Disclosure Requirement IRO-1 Description of the processes to identify and assess material
impacts, risks and opportunities; and (b) for all other requirements listed in Appendix C only if the
sustainability topic is material based on the undertaking’s materiality assessment (see ESRS 1
chapter 3 Double materiality as the basis for sustainability disclosures).’
ESRS 2 paragraph 17 states: ‘If an undertaking or group not exceeding on its balance sheet date
the average number of 750 employees during the financial year decides to omit the information
required by ESRS E4, ESRS S1, ESRS S2, ESRS S3 or ESRS S4 in accordance with Appendix C of ESRS
1, it shall nevertheless disclose whether the sustainability topics covered respectively by ESRS E4,
ESRS S1, ESRS S2, ESRS S3 and ESRS S4 have been assessed to be material as a result of the
undertaking’s materiality assessment. In addition, if one or more of these topics has been
assessed to be material, the undertaking shall, for each material topic:
(a) disclose the list of matters (i.e., topic, subtopic or sub-subtopic) in AR16 ESRS 1 Appendix A
that are assessed to be material and briefly describe how the undertaking’s business model
and strategy take account of the impacts of the undertaking related to those matters. The
undertaking may identify the matter at the level of topic, subtopic or sub-subtopic;
(b) briefly describe any time-bound targets it has set related to the matters in question, the
progress it has made towards achieving those targets, and whether its targets related to
biodiversity and ecosystems are based on conclusive scientific evidence;
(c) briefly describe its policies in relation to the matters in question;
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 54 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
(d) briefly describe actions it has taken to identify, monitor, prevent, mitigate, remediate or
bring an end to actual or potential adverse impacts related to the matters in question, and
the result of such actions; and;
(e) disclose metrics relevant to the matters in question.’
Answer
Yes.
ESRS 1 Appendix C states that the phase-in provisions relate to all disclosure requirements of the
topical standards. The term ‘all disclosure requirements’ also includes Disclosure Requirements in
the respective chapters in ‘ESRS 2 General Disclosures’ of the topical standards ESRS E4, S1, S2, S3
and S4.
However, the provisions of ESRS 1 Appendix C in relation to phase-in are to be read in conjunction
with ESRS 2 paragraph 17, which establishes minimum disclosures for the topics that have been
phased-in and that are material to the undertaking. To comply with these minimum disclosures,
a materiality analysis at the topical level is therefore needed to identify the material topics of ESRS
E4, S1, S2, S3 or S4. Reference is made to ID 58 – Transitional provisions 750 employees explaining
the requirements of ESRS 2 paragraph 17.
Question ID 910 – Transitional provisions for value chain and Scope 3
GHG emissions
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Can the transitional provision in ESRS 1 paragraphs 132 to 135 be applied to the reporting of
Scope 3 emissions in ESRS E1 paragraph 44 (c)?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraphs 132 to 135, ESRS 1 Appendix C: List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements;
ESRS 2 Appendix B: List of datapoints in cross-cutting and topical standards that derive from other
EU legislation; and ESRS E1 paragraph 44 (c)
Key Terms
Value chain, transitional provisions, Scope 3 GHG emissions
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph 44 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose in metric tonnes of CO2eq its:
(a) gross Scope 1 GHG emissions;
(b) gross Scope 2 GHG emissions;
(c) gross Scope 3 GHG emissions; and
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 55 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
(d) total GHG emissions.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 133 states: ‘For the first three years of its sustainability reporting under the
ESRS, in order to take account of the difficulties that undertakings may encounter in gathering
information from actors throughout their value chain and in order to limit the burden for SMEs
in the value chain:
(a) when disclosing information on policies, actions and targets in accordance with ESRS 2
and other ESRS, the undertaking may limit upstream and downstream value chain
information to information available in-house, such as data already available to the
undertaking and publicly available information; and
(b) when disclosing metrics, the undertaking is not required to include upstream and
downstream value chain information except for datapoints derived from other EU
legislation, as listed in ESRS 2 Appendix B.’
Answer
No, the transitional provisions outlined in ESRS 1 paragraphs 132 to 135 cannot be applied to
reporting Scope 3 emissions as required by ESRS E1 paragraph 44 (c). A phase-in exception applies
to undertakings or groups not exceeding on their balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year.
The disclosure of Scope 3 emissions is a datapoint derived from EU legislation, as indicated in
ESRS 2 Appendix B (Disclosure Requirement and related datapoint: ESRS E1-6 Gross Scope 1, 2, 3
and Total GHG emissions paragraph 44). Despite the transitional provisions of ESRS 1 paragraph
133 (b), datapoints derived from EU legislation, such as Scope 3 emissions, shall be reported.
It is, however, noteworthy that ‘undertakings or groups not exceeding on their balance sheet
dates the average number of 750 employees during the financial year (on a consolidated basis
where applicable) may omit the datapoints on Scope 3 emissions and total GHG emissions for the
first year of preparation of their sustainability statement’ (see ESRS 1 Appendix C: List of phased-
in Disclosure Requirements).
ESRS 2 General disclosures
ESRS 2 General disclosures
Question ID 733 – Overlap of ESRS 2 and topical standards
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Can the ESRS 2 datapoints be overlapping with those in topical standards? What would be the
scope of information the preparer is expected to provide within ESRS 2 (that is distinctive of
topical standards datapoints)?
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 56 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraph 115; ESRS 2 paragraph 2 and Appendix C; Disclosure Requirements related to
ESRS 2 in the topical ESRS
Key terms
ESRS 2-related disclosures in topical standards; structure of the sustainability statement
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 115 states: ‘The undertaking shall structure its sustainability statement in four
parts in the following order: general information, environmental information … social
information, and governance information. Respecting the provision in Section 3.6 Material
impacts or risks arising from actions to address sustainability matters of this Standard, when
information provided in one part contains information to be reported in another part, the
undertaking may refer in one part to information presented in another part, avoiding
duplications.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 2 states: ‘In the preparation of disclosures under this Standard, the undertaking
shall apply the Disclosure Requirements (including their datapoints) set in topical ESRS, as listed
in Appendix C of this Standard Disclosure/Application Requirements in topical ESRS that are
applicable in conjunction with ESRS 2 General Disclosures. The undertaking shall apply the
requirements listed in Appendix C:
(a) in all instances for the requirements in topical standards related to Disclosure
Requirement IRO-1 Description of the processes to identify and assess material impacts,
risks and opportunities; and
(b) for all other requirements listed in Appendix C, only if the sustainability topic is material
based on the undertaking’s materiality assessment (see ESRS 1 Chapter 3 Double
materiality as the basis for sustainability disclosures).’
Answer
No, the ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirements do not overlap with the Disclosure Requirements in
topical ESRS with the exception of the Minimum Disclosure Requirements (MDRs) in ESRS 2
Chapter 4.2 Minimum disclosure requirement on policies and actions and chapter 5 Metrics and
targets.
The MDR may overlap by definition with those in the topical standards as they are a checklist to
be used for completeness: i.e. when a datapoint in MDR is already covered by a topical standard,
undertakings are not supposed to report twice the same information.
Some Disclosure Requirements in the topical ESRS (labelled ‘Disclosure Requirement related to
ESRS 2 GOV-1, GOV-3, SBM-2, SBM-3 or IRO-1 …’ in the respective topical ESRS; see Appendix C of
ERSR 2) further specify the ESRS 2 disclosures in relation to the respective topical matter (see
ESRS 2 paragraph 2).
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 57 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
The ESRS 2 disclosures, together with their specifications in topical ESRS, are expected to be
disclosed as part of the general information of the sustainability statement. To avoid duplications,
an undertaking may refer in one part of the sustainability statement to information presented in
another part as stated in ESRS 1 paragraph 115. Reference is made to ID 296 – Location of ESRS 2-
related Disclosure Requirement of topical standards.
ESRS 2 BP-2 Disclosure in relation to specific circumstances
Question ID 58 - Transitional provisions 750 employees
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
If Appendix C of ESRS 1 allows companies under 750 employees to omit E4 and S1-4 for the first
three years, why does ESRS 2 paragraph 17 then say that the information still needs to be disclosed
if considered material? Is there a difference in granularity of information disclosed?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 Appendix C; ESRS 2 paragraph 17
Key terms
Phase-in 750 employees
Background
ESRS 2 paragraph 17 states the following: ‘If an undertaking or group not exceeding on its balance
sheet date the average number of 750 employees during the financial year decides to omit the
information required by ESRS E4, ESRS S1, ESRS S2, ESRS S3 or ESRS S4 in accordance with
Appendix C of ESRS 1, it shall nevertheless disclose whether the sustainability topics covered
respectively by ESRS E4, ESRS S1, ESRS S2, ESRS S3 and ESRS S4 have been assessed to be material
as a result of the undertaking’s materiality assessment. In addition, if one or more of these topics
has been assessed to be material, the undertaking shall, for each material topic:
(a) disclose the list of matters (i.e. topic, sub-topic or sub-sub-topic) in AR 16 ESRS 1 Appendix
A that are assessed to be material and briefly describe how the undertaking’s business
model and strategy take account of the impacts of the undertaking related to those matters.
The undertaking may identify the matter at the level of topic, sub-topic or sub-sub-topic;
(b) briefly describe any time-bound targets it has set related to the matters in question, the
progress it has made towards achieving those targets, and whether its targets related
to biodiversity and ecosystems are based on conclusive scientific evidence;
(c) briefly describe its policies in relation to the matters in question;
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 58 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
(d) briefly describe actions it has taken to identify, monitor, prevent, mitigate, remediate or
bring an end to actual or potential adverse impacts related to the matters in question, and
the result of such actions; and
(e) disclose metrics relevant to the matters in question.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 137 states: ‘Appendix C List of phase-in Disclosure Requirements in this Standard
sets phase-in provisions for the Disclosure Requirements or datapoints of Disclosure
Requirements in ESRS that may be omitted or that are not applicable in the first year(s) of
preparation of the sustainability statement under the ESRS.’
Appendix C of ESRS 1 ‘List of phase-in Disclosure Requirements’ has the following table:
ESRS Disclosure Full name of the Phase-in or effective date (including the first
Requirement Disclosure year)
Requirement
ESRS E4 All disclosure All disclosure Undertakings or groups not exceeding on their
requirements requirements balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year (on a
consolidated basis where applicable) may omit
the information specified in the disclosure
requirements of ESRS E4 for the first 2 years of
preparation of their sustainability statement.
ESRS S1 All disclosure All disclosure Undertakings or groups not exceeding on their
requirements requirements balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year (on a
consolidated basis where applicable) may omit
the information specified in the disclosure
requirements of ESRS S1 for the first year of
preparation of their sustainability statement.
ESRS S2 All disclosure All disclosure Undertakings or groups not exceeding on their
requirements requirements balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year (on a
consolidated basis where applicable) may omit
the information specified in the disclosure
requirements of ESRS S2 for the first 2 years of
preparation of their sustainability statement.
ESRS S3 All disclosure All disclosure Undertakings or groups not exceeding on their
requirements requirements balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year (on a
consolidated basis where applicable) may omit
the information specified in the disclosure
requirements of ESRS S3 for the first 2 years of
preparation of their sustainability statement.
ESRS S4 All disclosure All disclosure Undertakings or groups not exceeding on their
requirements requirements balance sheet dates the average number of 750
employees during the financial year (on a
consolidated basis where applicable) may omit
the information specified in the disclosure
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 59 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
requirements of ESRS S4 for the first 2 years of
preparation of their sustainability statement.
Answer
The transitional provisions apply to undertakings or groups not exceeding on their balance sheet
dates the average number of 750 employees during the financial year (on a consolidated basis
where applicable). The option is to omit the information required by all the disclosure
requirements in the following topical standards: ESRS E4, ESRS S1, ESRS S2, ESRS S3 and ESRS S4.
The regime of these provisions varies depending on the topical standard. The transitional
provisions on ESRS S1 only apply to the first year of preparation of the undertaking’s sustainability
statement. For ESRS E4, ESRS S2, ESRS S3 and ESRS S4, the provisions apply to the first two years
of preparation of the sustainability statement.
When information about a topic is omitted, the undertaking is nevertheless required to include
the topic in the scope of the materiality assessment. When information required by one of these
topical standards is omitted but the topic is assessed to be material, ‘de minimis’ disclosures shall
be reported covering the material topic in question (ESRS 2 paragraph 17).
The materiality assessment covers the environmental, social and governance matters connected
to the undertaking as established by the CSRD (i.e., a climate-first approach or an environmental
only approach was not the intention of the co-legislators); the sustainability statement is to
include a holistic view of sustainability matters regardless of whether social standards are subject
to transitional provisions. Hence, the ESRS 2 paragraph 17 provision aims at ensuring that there is
a certain level of ‘minimal disclosures’ that are required regardless of whether the undertaking
chooses to apply the transitional provisions.
The transitional provisions allow undertakings to provide less granular information than what is
required after the transition period. The information to be provided for the matters are more
summarised (i.e., as briefly as referred to in the text) than the requirements set out in the five
topical standards mentioned above. The main simplifications in paragraph 17 compared to
paragraph 48 of ESRS 2 are the following:
(a) Paragraph 48 (a): Under ESRS 2 paragraph 17, the undertaking may choose to disclose at
topic, subtopic or sub-subtopic level, and separate disclosure of material impacts, risks
and opportunities is not required. The undertaking is not required to disclose where in its
business model, its own operations and its upstream and downstream value chain
material IROs are concentrated.
(b) Paragraph 48 (b) relates to how the undertaking takes into account material impacts on
its strategy and business model. This information related to impacts can be disclosed at
a summarised level without all the granularity required by the datapoints therein.
(c) Paragraph 48 (c) to (h) sets requirements to disclose more detailed information about
material IROs. As these are not required to be identified in the transition period, these
datapoints do not form part of the ‘de minimis’ disclosures. While this is not a
requirement, in the transitional period it may be helpful to briefly disclose the
information on paragraph 48 (c) to contextualise the material impacts identified.
ESRS 2 paragraph 17 (b) to (e) provides de minimis information corresponding to disclosure
requirements in topical standards in case an undertaking elects not to disclose topical information
in the transition period. The transitional provision requires a summarised description of the
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 60 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
policies, actions and targets and does not require to fulfil the detailed datapoints in MDR (P, T, A)
in ESRS 2 and/or topical standards.
Finally, for metrics, the undertaking is to apply judgement to fulfil the requirements of metrics in
topical standards. Such judgement relates to the number and nature of metrics disclosed (i.e., the
undertaking may disclose a reduced number of metrics and not all the metrics that are material)
and the level of granularity of the metric (for example, the metric may be presented at a global
level without breakdowns).
Question ID 504 – Disclosure Requirements on material metrics when
information is not available
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
If the undertaking cannot disclose information regarding policies, actions or targets, it shall then
disclose this to be the case and may report on a timeframe to have these in place. Is this also the
case for metrics?
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement BP-2 – Disclosures in relation to specific circumstances, paragraph
11 Sources of estimation and outcome uncertainty
Key terms
Unavailability of information on material metrics
Background
According to ESRS 1 paragraph 33, if the undertaking has not established policies, taken actions
or set targets for the topic, then it shall disclose this to be the case and may report a timeframe
in which it aims to have these in place (see also ESRS 1 Appendix E: Flowchart for determining
disclosures under ESRS).
According to ESRS 1 paragraph 34, the undertaking shall disclose information on metrics if the
Disclosure Requirement or the individual datapoints are assessed to be material.
Clarification is needed in the case where the information of a Disclosure Requirement or
datapoint on metrics is assessed as material but the undertaking does not have the information
available.
ESRS 2 paragraph 11 requires disclosures on sources of estimation and outcome uncertainty.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 61 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Answer
No, this is not the case for metrics. The treatment of paragraph 33 of ESRS 1 is limited to policies,
actions and targets and cannot be applied by analogy to metrics – to which paragraph 34 applies
instead. Material metrics are to be reported. If the metric cannot be determined through direct
data collection, it shall be estimated.
The level of measurement uncertainty of metrics is not a reason for omitting them. According to
ESRS 2 BP-2, if a metric is subject to a high level of measurement uncertainty, the undertaking
shall disclose information about the sources of measurement uncertainty (for example,
availability and quality of data) and disclose the assumptions, approximations and judgments that
the entity has made in measuring it.
ESRS 2 GOV-1 The role of administrative, management and supervisory
bodies
https://xbrl.efrag.org/e-esrs/esrs-set1-2023.html#d1e6065-3-1
Question ID 171 and ID 358 – Administrative, management and
supervisory bodies
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Please clarify with examples what is meant by ‘administrative, management and supervisory
bodies’ as a collective versus ‘management’ and ‘management-level position’ versus ‘senior
executive management’.
[This explanation also answers question ID 358:] Could you please specify clearly what is to be
included in the administrative, management and supervisory bodies? By this, I mean, it refers to
only a highest body (Board of Directors) or it refers to another body or other bodies?
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 paragraph 22 (a) and (d)
Key terms
Administrative, management, and supervisory bodies
Background
The Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms defines ‘administrative, management and
supervisory bodies’ as follows:
‘The governance bodies with the highest decision-making authority in the undertaking include its
committees. If in the governance structure there are no members of the administrative,
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 62 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
management or supervisory bodies of the undertaking, the CEO and, if such function exists, the
deputy CEO should be included. In some jurisdictions, governance systems consist of two tiers,
where supervision and management are separated. In such cases, both tiers are included under
the definition of administrative, management and supervisory bodies.’
GRI is also a useful source of complementary guidance: GRI uses ‘highest governance body’ as
well in reference to the ‘administrative, management and supervisory bodies’. GRI 102 requires
jurisdictions with two tiers of governance bodies to consider both as ‘highest governance bodies’.
ESRS do not define the term ‘senior executive management’. However, GRI explicitly defines
‘senior executive management’ in GRI 102 as top-ranking members of the management of an
organisation including a Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and individuals reporting directly to the CEO
or to the highest governance body. Each organisation defines which members of its management
teams are senior executives.
Undertakings might report the identity of their ‘management body’ and ‘governance body’ as part
of the corporate governance statement as they are key actors in the national corporate
governance codes. ESRS 1 paragraph 119 allows an undertaking to incorporate in the sustainability
statement information prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement of ESRS, including a specific
datapoint prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement by reference to the corporate governance
statement (if not part of the management report), provided that the conditions in paragraph 120
are met.
Answer
As defined in Annex II of ESRS, administrative, management and supervisory bodies as a collective
have the highest decision-making authority. The governance bodies which are covered under this
definition can vary from one jurisdiction to another. This is because some jurisdictions have
different bodies for management and supervision, respectively, whereas others have one unique
body carrying out both roles.
‘Senior executive management’ must be understood as a higher position than a ‘management-
level position’.
In the description of their governance bodies and management, undertakings need to ensure
consistency between the sustainability statement and the corporate governance statement as
well as other corporate communications in general.
Question ID 728 – Representation of employees and other workers
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Is the ‘representation of employees and other workers’ in ESRS 2 paragraph 21 (b) asking which
of the board members is also an employee, or is it about whether there are workers’
representatives in the board?
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 63 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 paragraph 21 (b)
Key terms
Representation of employees and other workers
Background
ESRS 2 paragraph 21 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the following information about the
composition and diversity of the members of the undertaking’s administrative, management and
supervisory bodies:…
(b) representation of employees and other workers …’.
GRI is also a useful source of complementary guidance since it also requires describing the
composition of the highest governance body and its committees. However, ESRS paragraph 21 (b)
requires reporting the representation of employees and other workers, whereas GRI 2-9-c-viii
requires reporting stakeholder representation, which includes but is not limited to employees and
other workers.
Answer
The undertaking shall disclose whether there are representatives of the undertaking’s employees
and other workers in their administrative, management and supervisory bodies. This is because
ESRS 2 paragraph 21 (b) requires information on the ‘representation of employees and other
workers’. These representatives are selected in line with EU / national legislation on worker
representation in administrative, management and supervisory bodies, i.e. being either elected
directly by the workforce or appointed by workers’ representative bodies, e.g. trade unions, works
councils or European works councils.
Question ID 781 – General meeting
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Is the general meeting to be considered as an ‘administrative, management and supervisory
body’? The general meeting is usually a company’s highest decision-making body. However, it
seems that the general meeting is not mentioned once in any of EFRAG’s materials, such as Q&As,
and the focus is on the Board of Directors, its committees and the CEO.
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 GOV-1
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 64 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Key terms
Categorisation of the general meeting
Background
Annex II of the ESRS defines ‘administrative, management and supervisory bodies’ as follows: ‘The
governance bodies with the highest decision-making authority in the undertaking including its
committees. If in the governance structure there are no members of the administrative,
management or supervisory bodies of the undertaking, the CEO, and if such function exists, the
deputy CEO, should be included. In some jurisdictions, governance systems consist of two tiers,
where supervision and management are separated. In such cases, both tiers are included under
the definition of administrative, management and supervisory bodies.’
In contrast, the general meeting is a mandatory annual meeting in which an undertaking’s
shareholders or owners exercise their decision-making powers. Matters within the decision-
making power of the general meetings include the matters provided for in law or the articles of
association, such as the remuneration and appointment of directors and auditors, adoption of the
company’s financial statements, distribution of assets, discharge from liability of the executives,
amendments to the articles of association and decisions relating to the company’s shares or share
capital.
The Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on the
annual financial statements, consolidated financial statements and related reports of certain
types of undertakings makes a clear distinction between the general meeting (or shareholder
meeting) and the administrative, management and supervisory bodies and their committees.
Additionally, national Corporate Governance Codes make a similar distinction and provide
guidance and recommendations regarding best practices for both the general meeting and the
administrative, management and supervisory bodies.
Answer
No, the general meeting should not be considered an ‘administrative, management and
supervisory body’. It is a separate governance body with specific powers attributed to
shareholders or owners. The general meeting is not addressed by ESRS but instead by the
Accounting Directive using, however, the term ‘shareholder meeting’ with respect to the
Corporate Governance Statement and by the national Corporate Governance Codes.
ESRS 2 SBM-1 Strategy, business model and value chain
Question ID 39 – SBM-1 sector breakdown and phase-in
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
What are the ‘ESRS sectors’ mentioned under the ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement SBM-1 in
paragraph 40 (b)?
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 65 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 paragraph 40; ESRS 1 paragraph 137 and Appendix C: List of phased-in Disclosure
Requirements
Key terms
Sector-breakdown
Background
ESRS 2 paragraph 40 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the following information about the
key elements of its general strategy that relate to or affect sustainability matters: . . . (b) a
breakdown of total revenue, as included in its financial statements, by significant ESRS sectors.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 137 states: ‘Appendix C List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements in this
Standard sets phase-in provisions for the Disclosure Requirements or datapoints of Disclosure
Requirements in ESRS that may be omitted or that are not applicable in the first year(s) of
preparation of the sustainability statement under the ESRS.’
ESRS 1 Appendix C states: ‘The undertaking shall report the information prescribed by ESRS 2 SBM-
1 paragraph 40 (b) (breakdown of total revenue by significant ESRS sector) and 40 (c) (list of
additional significant ESRS sectors) starting from the application date specified in a Commission
Delegated Act to be adopted pursuant to article 29b(1) third subparagraph point (ii), of Directive
2013/34/EU.’
The Accounting Directive Article 29b(1) third subparagraph point (ii) of Directive 2013/34/EU
states: ‘In the delegated acts referred to in the first subparagraph the Commission shall, by 30
June 2024, specify: . . . (ii) information that undertakings are to report that is specific to the sector
in which they operate.’
Answer
The ESRS Sectors will be defined in a future delegated act, following the issuance of a draft ESRS
to be prepared by EFRAG.
As the European Commission has not adopted a delegated act specifying the list of ESRS sectors,
undertakings are not required to disclose the information referred to in ESRS 2 paragraph 40 (b).
Question ID 293 - Relationship of strategy and policy
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
What is developed first: the strategy or the policy related to sustainability matters?
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 66 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement SBM-1 and MDR-P of ESRS 2; Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of
Terms definition of policies
Key terms
Strategy, policy
Background
ESRS 2 paragraph 38 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the elements of its strategy that relate
to or impact sustainability matters, its business model and its value chain.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 63 states: ‘The undertaking shall apply the minimum disclosure requirements
defined in this provision when it discloses the policies it has in place with regard to each
sustainability matter identified as material.’
A policy according to the Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms is ‘A set or framework of
general objectives and management principles that the undertaking uses for decision-making. A
policy implements the undertaking’s strategy or management decisions related to a material
sustainability matter.’
Answer
While ESRS set disclosure requirements, they do not prescribe behavioural obligations in respect
to strategy and policies.
The development of a strategy or policy related to sustainability matters is determined by the
undertaking’s governance bodies.
Question ID 395 – Revenue/net revenue
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
What does net revenue mean? How is it calculated?
ESRS reference
All Disclosure Requirements require a breakdown of revenue or an intensity metric based on net
revenue, for example, ESRS 2 Disclosure requirement SBM-1 Strategy, business model and value
chain paragraph 40 (b); ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-5 Energy consumption and mix
paragraph 40; ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6 Gross scopes 1,2,3 and Total GHG emissions
paragraph 53; and ESRS Disclosure requirement E3-4 Water consumption paragraph 29.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 67 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Key terms
Revenue, net revenue, net turnover
Background
ESRS use the terms ‘revenue’, ‘total revenue’ and ‘net revenue’ as synonyms. ESRS 2 refers to
‘revenue’ or ‘total revenue’ (see ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement SBM-1 – Strategy, business model
and value chain) whereas ESRS E1 and the other environmental ESRS refer mostly to ‘net
revenue’.
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 36 (e) states: ‘When preparing the information on energy intensity required
under paragraph 40, the undertaking shall calculate the net revenue in line with the accounting
standards’ requirements applicable for the financial statements, i.e., IFRS 15 Revenue from
Contracts with Customers or local GAAP requirements.’
ESRS do not use the term ‘net turnover’ as used by the Accounting Directive (Directive
2013/34/EU Article 2 (5)) The Accounting Directive defines ‘net turnover’ as the amounts derived
from the sale of products and the provision of services after deducting sales rebates and value
added tax and other taxes directly linked to turnover; however, for insurance undertakings
referred to in point (a) of the first subparagraph of Article 1 (3) of this Directive, ‘net turnover’
shall be defined in accordance with Article 35 and point 2 of Article 66 of Council Directive
91/674/EEC; for credit institutions referred to in point (b) of the first subparagraph of Article 1
(3) of this Directive, ‘net turnover’ shall be defined in accordance with point (c) of Article 43 (2)
of Council Directive 86/635/EEC; and for undertakings falling under the scope of Article 40a(1) of
this Directive, ‘net turnover’ means the revenue as defined by or within the meaning of the
financial reporting framework on the basis of which the financial statements of the undertaking
are prepared’.
The Delegated Act (EU) 2021/2178 specifying Article 8 of the Taxonomy Directive related to
environmental taxonomy disclosures also uses the term ‘net turnover’ (see the supporting
material below).
Answer
The terms ‘revenue’, ‘total revenue’ and ‘net revenue’ are to be understood as the amounts
presented in the income statement of the undertaking’s financial statements in accordance with
the applicable legislation and/or accounting standards, i.e. IAS 1 paragraph 82 (a)2 – if IFRS
Standards are applied – or generally accepted national accounting principles (national GAAP).
Reference is made to ID 482 Breakdown of total revenue – financial institutions.
Supporting material
Delegated Act (EU) 2021/2178 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2020/852 specifying the content
to be disclosed and its presentation by undertakings subject to Articles 19a or 29a of Directive
2013/34/EU, concerning environmentally sustainable economic activities and specifying the
2 Or any future standard superseding IAS 1.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 68 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
methodology to comply with that disclosure obligation, Annex I paragraph 1.1.1 (Delegated Act
specifying article 8 of the Taxonomy Directive), states: ‘… net turnover (denominator) as defined
in Article 2, point (5), of Directive 2013/34/EU … shall cover the revenue recognised pursuant to
International Accounting Standard (IAS) 1, paragraph 82 (a), as adopted by Commission
Regulation (EC) 1126/20081.’
Question ID 482 – Breakdown of total revenue – financial institutions
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
1. How is the total revenue of a credit institution defined?
2. How is it divided into ESRS sectors? Is it the sector ‘credit institution’ or the sectors for
the business portfolio, i.e., the sectors of the financed portfolio?
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 paragraph 40
Key terms
Breakdown of total revenue; financial institutions
Background
[To note: The submitter asked the following question, which was amended as stated above to
align it with the wording of ESRS 2 paragraph 40: ‘How is total income of a credit institution
defined and how is it divided into ESRS sectors? Is it the sector ‘credit institution’ or the sectors
for the business portfolio, i.e., the sectors of the financed portfolio?’]
ESRS 2 paragraph 40 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the following information about the
key elements of its general strategy that relate to or affect sustainability matters … (b) a
breakdown of total revenue, as included in its financial statements, by significant ESRS sectors.’
ESRS 2 paragraph AR 12 states: ‘To provide the information on sectors required by paragraph 40,
the undertaking shall map its significant activities in accordance with ESRS sectors. If a code for a
subsector does not exist, the caption “others” shall be used.’
ESRS do not use the term ‘net turnover’ as used by the Accounting Directive (Directive
2013/34/EU Article 2 (5)). The Accounting Directive defines ‘net turnover’ (Directive 2013/34/EU
Article 2 (5)): ‘net turnover’ means the amounts derived from the sale of products and the
provision of services after deducting sales rebates and value added tax and other taxes directly
linked to turnover; however, for insurance undertakings referred to in point (a) of the first
subparagraph of Article 1 (3) of this Directive, ‘net turnover’ shall be defined in accordance with
Article 35 and point 2 of Article 66 of Council Directive 91/674/EEC; for credit institutions referred
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 69 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
to in point (b) of the first subparagraph of Article 1 (3) of this Directive, ‘net turnover’ shall be
defined in accordance with point (c) of Article 43 (2) of Council Directive 86/635/EEC; …’
Council Directive 86/635/EEC of December 1991 on the annual accounts and consolidated
accounts of banks and other financial institutions, Article 43 (2) point (c), states: ‘The information
referred to in the first two indents of Article 9 (2) of Directive 83/349/EEC, namely … [that] the
net turnover shall be replaced by … the sum of items … B 1, B 2, B 3, B 4 and B 7 in Article 28 of
this Directive.’
Council Directive 86/635/EEC Article 28 states:
‘B. Income
(a) Interest receivable and similar income, showing separately that arising from fixed-income
securities
(b) Income from securities:
a. Income from shares and other variable-yield securities
b. Income from participating interests
c. Income from shares in affiliated undertakings
(c) Commissions receivable
(d) Net profit on financial operations
(a) (…)
(b) 7. Other operating income …’
Answer
1. How is total revenue of a credit institution defined?
Total revenue of a credit institution, according to ESRS 2 paragraph 40, is a proxy for ‘net turnover’
as defined in the Accounting Directive (Directive 2013/34/EU) Article 2 (5).
ESRS use the terms ‘revenue’, ‘total revenue’ and ‘net revenue’ as synonyms. ESRS 2 refers to
‘revenue’ or ‘total revenue’ (see ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement SBM-1 – Strategy, business model
and value chain) whereas ESRS E1 and the other environmental ESRS refer mostly to ‘net
revenue’. The three terms are referred to in ESRS in a more generic way as a proxy for ‘net
turnover’ as defined by the Accounting Directive by considering the revenue as defined by the
financial reporting framework applicable to the financial statements of the undertaking,
acknowledging in whatever way possible revenues that are defined under the applicable GAAP.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 70 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
2. How is it divided into ESRS sectors? Is it the sector ‘credit institution’ or the sectors for
the business portfolio, i.e., the sectors of the financed portfolio?
Credit institutions should not refer to the sectors of the financed portfolio for the purposes of
ESRS 2 paragraph 40. For presenting the revenue breakdown by ESRS sector, they should refer to
the sectors in which they directly operate, not the sectors in which their clients operate.
Reference is made to ID 395 Revenue / net revenue and ID 39 SBM-1 Sector breakdown and phase-
in.
ESRS 2 SBM 3 Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their
interaction with strategy and business model
Question ID 67 - ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement SBM-3
vocabulary/grammar used
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Can you provide a more detailed explanation on how the expression ‘as opposed to’ is to be
interpreted in the context of the Disclosure Requirement SBM-3 of ESRS 2?
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 paragraph 48 (h)
Key terms
n/a
Background
According to ESRS 2 paragraph 48 (h), the undertaking shall disclose a specification of those
impacts, risks and opportunities that are covered by ESRS Disclosure Requirements as opposed to
those covered by the undertaking using additional entity-specific disclosures.
Answer
ESRS 1 chapter 1.1 describes the three categories of ESRS standards (i.e., cross-cutting, topical and
sector-specific). ESRS 1 paragraph 11 explains the entity-specific disclosures that complement the
disclosures laid out in these three categories of ESRS standards.
In addition, ESRS 1 paragraphs AR1 to AR5 provide further guidance on the requirements that
entity-specific disclosures shall fulfil.
ESRS 2 paragraph 48 (h) requires undertakings to separately distinguish those material impacts,
risks and opportunities whose disclosures follow the ESRS standards (i.e., standardised
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 71 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
disclosures) from those that have been specifically designed by the undertaking according to the
provision in ESRS 1 paragraph 11 and its related Application Requirements (i.e., entity-specific
disclosures).
ESRS 2 IRO-1 Description of the processes to identify and assess material
impacts, risks and opportunities
Question ID 245 – Climate-risk analysis
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
What is the relationship between:
(a) impacts, risks and opportunities related to climate change that are to be identified and
assessed in your materiality analysis (ESRS E1 paragraph 20); and
(b) detailed analyses (using scenario analysis) for climate-related impacts, physical risks and
transition risks and opportunities (ESRS E1 paragraph 21)
according to ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirements related to ESRS 2 IRO-1?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 20, 21, AR 9-15
Key terms
Climate-risk analysis
Background
The original question received was the following: ’What is the difference between: …?’
The ESRS distinguish between impacts, risks and opportunities (‘IROs’) of the undertaking, which
are defined in Annex II of the Delegated Act. The undertaking is required to disclose the processes
to identify the IROs and to assess which ones are material (ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement IRO-
1). Consequently, the ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 seeks transparency
on the approach taken to assess its material climate-related IROs.
ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1 is conceptually divided into paragraphs
that require describing the processes to assess:
(a) impacts on climate change (ESRS E1 paragraphs 20 (a), AR 9 and AR 10);
(b) climate-related physical risks (ESRS E1 paragraphs 20 (b) and AR 11); and
(c) climate-related transition risks and opportunities (ESRS E1 paragraphs 20 (c) and AR 12).
The ESRS E1 paragraphs 20 (b)(i) and 20 (c)(i) as well as the corresponding AR 11 and AR 12 refer
directly to specific climate scenarios. At the same time, ESRS E1 paragraph 21 requires
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 72 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
information on how climate-scenario analysis was used to inform the identification and
assessment of physical risks and transition risks and opportunities. Additionally, ESRS E1
paragraph AR 13 seeks transparency on how the scenario analysis was used in relation to
disclosures in ESRS E1 paragraphs 19 (ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement SBM-3) as well as ESRS E1
paragraphs 20, 21, AR 10 and AR 11 (ESRS 2 IRO-1). ESRS E1 paragraph AR 15 requires explanation
of how the climate scenarios are compatible with critical assumptions made in the financial
statements. Finally, ESRS E1 paragraph AR 14 provides a reference to existing guidance,
frameworks and standards on scenario analysis.
Annex II to the Delegated Act introduces definitions of impacts, sustainability-related impacts,
risks, sustainability-related risks, material risks, physical risks, climate-related physical risks,
climate-related transition risks, opportunities, material opportunities and climate-related
opportunities.
Answer
Impacts, risks and opportunities related to sustainability matters are assessed for materiality and
reported when material. The identification of material impacts, risks and opportunities is the
outcome of the materiality assessment process.
Paragraphs 20 and 21 of ESRS E1 set the Disclosure Requirements related to the process followed
in order to identify material impacts, risks and opportunities related to climate change that are
to be reported.
Preparing a scenario analysis is not a direct requirement in ESRS E1 per se, but several ESRS E1
disclosures refer to it as a foundation for the information to be disclosed. For instance, when the
undertaking develops climate scenario analysis, its outcome informs the materiality assessment,
particularly for the identification of risks and opportunities (ESRS E1 paragraph 21). It is generally
used to develop the resilience analysis (ESRS E1 paragraph 19).
Scenario analysis involves identifying and evaluating a range of future events and outcomes under
conditions of uncertainty. It deals with the underlying uncertainty in the quantification of the
future value of decision variables for one single scenario as well as with the uncertainty of
different future scenarios. Scenario analysis helps ensure the quality of the information provided.
In ESRS this is reflected in the Disclosure Requirement on processes to identify and assess climate
risks, which requires explanation of whether the assessment of climate-related physical risks
considered at least a high emission climate scenario and whether the assessment of transition
risks considered at least a climate scenario in line with limiting global warming to 1.5°C with no
or limited overshooting. These requirements provide transparency on how the assessment of
physical and transition risks of climate change has been done and help to better understand how
they may impact the undertaking’s business, strategies and financial performance over time.
Question ID 517 – Disclosure of thresholds
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
1. How is threshold-setting to be documented?
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 73 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
2. How is one to disclose on threshold-setting? Is it enough to just generally explain how the
thresholds for the materiality assessment are set, or is it necessary to explain each
threshold separately?
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 paragraph 59 (IRO-2) and 53 (c) ii (IRO-1)
Key terms
Disclosure of thresholds
Background
[The question received, ‘How to document on setting thresholds? Is it enough to just generally
explain how the thresholds for the materiality assessment are set or is it necessary to explain each
threshold separately?’ was reworded for the sake of clarity into the question above.]
ESRS 2 paragraph 53 (b) and (c) states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose:
(…)
(b) an overview of the process to identify, assess, prioritise and monitor the undertaking’s
potential and actual impacts on people and the environment, informed by the
undertaking’s due diligence process, including an explanation of whether and how the
process:
(…)
(iv) prioritises negative impacts based on their relative severity and likelihood (see
ESRS 1 section 3.4 Impact materiality) and, if applicable, positive impacts on their
relative scale, scope and likelihood, and determines which sustainability matters
are material for reporting purposes, including the qualitative or quantitative
thresholds and other criteria used as prescribed by ESRS 1 section 3.4 Impact
materiality;
(c) an overview of the process used to identify, assess, prioritise and monitor risks and
opportunities that have or may have financial effects. The disclosure shall include:
(…)
(ii) how the undertaking assesses the likelihood, magnitude and nature of effects of
the identified risks and opportunities (such as the qualitative or quantitative
thresholds and other criteria used as prescribed by ESRS 1 section 3.3 Financial
materiality) …’
ESRS 2 paragraph 59 states: ‘The undertaking shall provide an explanation of how it has
determined the material information to be disclosed in relation to the impacts, risks and
opportunities that it has assessed to be material, including the use of thresholds and/or how it
has implemented the criteria in ESRS 1 section 3.2 Material matters and materiality of
information.’
Answer
1. How is threshold-setting to be documented?
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 74 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS do not set behavioural requirements. As explained in IG 1 Materiality Assessment FAQ 12
Should the materiality assessment be documented/evidenced? the ESRS do not prescribe specific
documentation. However, it is reasonable to expect that a certain level of documentation will
need to be produced. This will probably be used for internal control purposes and requested by
the assurance providers of the undertaking’s sustainability statement.
2. How is one to disclose on threshold-setting? Is it enough to just generally explain how the
thresholds for the materiality assessment are set, or is it necessary to explain each
threshold separately?
Disclosing or explaining each threshold separately is not required in all circumstances. ESRS 2
requires disclosing an overview of the process to identify, assess, prioritise and monitor:
(a) impacts … including an explanation of whether and how the process … determines which
sustainability matters are material … including the qualitative or quantitative thresholds
and other criteria … and
(b) risks and opportunities … including how the undertaking assesses … risks and
opportunities such as the qualitative or quantitative thresholds and other criteria …’
Depending on its specific facts and circumstances, the description and disclosure of thresholds
may be more or less granular. Information about thresholds, as well as information about the
materiality process in general and its components, may be aggregated when this is compatible
with paragraphs 54 to 57 of ESRS 1.
ESRS 2 IRO-2 Disclosure Requirements in ESRS covered by the undertaking’s
sustainability statement
Question ID 335 - Applicability of EU data points – Appendix B
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Are ESRS 2 Appendix B datapoints (other EU legislation) applicable for all undertakings or for
financial institutions only?
ESRS reference
ESRS 2 Appendix B; ESRS 1 chapter 10.2, paragraphs 35 and 133
Key terms
ESRS 2 Appendix B (other EU legislation); EU data-points
Background
[The question initially received by EFRAG from the submitter was referring to ESRS 1 chapter 10.2
paragraph 133 and read as follows: ‘What is the rationale for making the exception to the
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 75 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
transitional provision for datapoints that have their origin in certain EU legislation (Appendix B of
ESRS 2) applying to a very specific set of companies (e.g., financial institutions)? Why not make a
separate list of datapoint exceptions with an explanation of why these datapoints are an
exception?’ As similar questions related to ‘other EU legislation datapoints’ have been received
by EFRAG, the question answered in this explanation was modified to be more generally
applicable as stated above.]
ESRS 1 paragraph 133 states: ‘For the first 3 years of its sustainability reporting under the ESRS, in
order to take account of the difficulties that undertakings may encounter in gathering information
from actors throughout their value chain and in order to limit the burden for SMEs in the value
chain: . . .
(b) when disclosing metrics, the undertaking is not required to include upstream and
downstream value chain information, except for datapoints derived from other EU
legislation, as listed in ESRS 2 Appendix B.’
ESRS 2 Appendix B includes the list of datapoints in cross-cutting and topical standards that derive
from other EU legislation. These datapoints provide information from all undertakings subject to
ESRS for financial institutions to support them in financing the transition according to the ‘green
deal.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 35 states: ‘If the undertaking omits the information prescribed by a datapoint
that derives from other EU legislation listed in Appendix B of ESRS 2, it shall explicitly state that
the information in question is “not material”.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 56 states: ‘The undertaking shall also include a table of all the datapoints that
derive from other EU legislation as listed in Appendix B of this standard, indicating where they can
be found in the sustainability statement and including those that the undertaking has assessed as
not material, in which case the undertaking shall indicate “Not material” in the table in accordance
with ESRS 1 paragraph 35.’
Answer
Yes, ESRS 2 Appendix B datapoints (other EU legislation) are applicable for all undertakings in the
scope of the CSRD/ESRS.
ESRS do not specify that datapoints listed in Appendix B of ESRS 2 are exclusively applicable to
undertakings in specific sectors, such as financial institutions. This is because these datapoints
provide information from all ESRS-reporters enabling financial institutions to meet their
obligations under the SFDR, thereby assisting them in financing the transition in alignment with
the EU Green Deal, as they are designed to support the availability of information regarding their
investees and clients.
Datapoints that derive from other EU legislation listed in Appendix B of ESRS 2 must be provided
irrespective of the materiality assessment if the corresponding requirement is in ESRS 2 (e.g., ESRS
2 Disclosure Requirement GOV-1, Board gender diversity). If the corresponding requirement is in
the topical standards, they are subject to the materiality assessment.
In all cases, the undertaking should publish a table containing all the information required by other
EU legislations, specifying the page of the sustainability statement where this information is
located or indicating ‘not material’ if the company has deemed it as such, as required by ESRS 2
Disclosure Requirement IRO-2.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 76 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Question ID 628 – Content index
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
‘Content index’: How are companies to format this disclosure? Are companies expected to use
reference codes to the DR codes? Is it to be published as a Reference Table/Index or can it be
formatted more narratively in the management reports such as in the TCFD’s?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 8; ESRS 2 IRO-2
Key terms
Content index
Background
ESRS 2 paragraph 56 states: ‘The undertaking shall include a list of the Disclosure Requirements
complied with in preparing the sustainability statement following the outcome of the materiality
assessment (see ESRS 1 chapter 3), including the page numbers and/or paragraphs where the
related disclosures are located in the sustainability statement. This may be presented as a content
index. The undertaking shall also include a table of all the datapoints that derive from other EU
legislation as listed in Appendix B of this Standard, indicating where they can be found in the
sustainability statement and including those that the undertaking has assessed as not material,
in which case the undertaking shall indicate “not material” in the table in accordance with ESRS 1
paragraph 35.’
Answer
The undertaking shall include:
(a) a list of the Disclosure Requirements complied with, including the page numbers and/or
paragraphs where the related disclosures are in the sustainability statement (ESRS 2
paragraph 56). This may be presented as a content index;
(b) a table of all the datapoints that derive from other EU legislation as listed in ESRS 2
Appendix B, indicating where they can be found in the sustainability statement and those
that the undertaking has assessed as not material, in which case the undertaking shall
indicate “not material” in the table in accordance with ESRS 1 paragraph 35.
There is no predefined format for this disclosure or for the content index. To structure the
sustainability statement, inspiration can be drawn from the digital ESRS XBRL Taxonomy.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 77 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS 2 Minimum disclosure requirement on policies and actions
Question ID 306 - Location of MDR in the report during phase-in 750
employees
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
In the first years of the phase-in 750 employees, where should the disclosures required by ESRS 2
Disclosure Requirement BP-2 (paragraph 17) be reported?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraph 115; ESRS 2 Minimum Disclosure Requirements paragraphs 61 and 71
Key words
Minimum disclosure requirements; phase-in less than 750 employees; transitional provisions
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 115 states: ‘The undertaking shall structure its sustainability statement in four
parts, in the following order: general information, environmental information, social information
and governance information . . . When information provided in one part contains information to
be reported in another part, the undertaking may refer in one part to information presented in
another part, avoiding duplications. The undertaking may apply the detailed structure illustrated
in Appendix F . . .’ of ESRS 1.
ESRS 2 paragraph 61 states in respect of policies and targets: ‘The minimum disclosure
requirements on policies and actions shall be located alongside disclosures prescribed by the
relevant ESRS. When a single policy or same actions address several interconnected sustainability
matters, the undertaking may disclose the required information in its reporting under one topical
ESRS and cross-reference to it in its reporting under other topical ESRS.’
ESRS 2 paragraph 71 states in respect of metrics and targets: ‘The corresponding disclosures shall
be located alongside disclosures prescribed by the topical ESRS.’
Answer
The undertaking shall structure its sustainability statement in four parts (ESRS 1 paragraph 115).
ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement BP-2 (including its paragraph 17) is part of the general information
required by ESRS 2 and as such, on a literal reading of ESRS 1 paragraph 115, could be disclosed
as part of the general information, for example, together with the Disclosure Requirement SBM-
3 Material impacts, risks and opportunities and their interaction with strategy and business
model.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 78 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
However, based on ESRS 1 paragraph 115, environmental, social and governance related
information can – appropriately cross-referenced - also be disclosed with the respective
environmental, social and governance related parts of the sustainability statement. This is in line
with ESRS 2 paragraph 61 on the minimum disclosure requirement for policies and actions and
with ESRS 2 paragraph 71 on metrics and targets, both allowing information to be located
alongside disclosures prescribed by the relevant topical ESRS.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 79 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Questions related to Environment
ESRS E1 Climate change
ESRS E1 Climate change
ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2 IRO-1
Question ID 350 - Gross risk
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
ESRS E1 paragraph 20 b(ii) and 20 c(ii) make reference to ‘Gross’ risk, yet ‘Gross Risk’ (or
comparable terms) is not included in the ESRS Glossary (i.e., is not clearly defined). Is it correct to
say that climate risk and scenario analysis/assessments processes should be done on an
inherent/gross (i.e., pre-control/mitigation strategy) risk (not a residual/net risk post-
control/mitigation) basis?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 20 b(ii), and 20 c(ii)
Key Terms
Gross risk; physical risk; transition risk
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph 20 b(ii) states: ‘The undertaking shall describe the process to identify and
assess climate-related impacts, risks and opportunities. This description shall include its process
in relation to: …
(a) climate-related physical risks in own operations and along the upstream and
downstream value chain, in particular: …
ii. the assessment of how its assets and business activities may be exposed and
are sensitive to these climate-related hazards, creating gross physical risks for the
undertaking; …
(c) climate-related transition risks and opportunities in own operations and along the
upstream and downstream value chain, in particular: …
ii. the assessment of how its assets and business activities may be exposed to
these climate-related transition events, creating gross transition risks or
opportunities for the undertaking.’
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 80 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement IRO-1 details the processes to identify and assess climate-related
impacts, risks and opportunities. It requires the assessment of gross material risks. This process
allows to respond to ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirement SBM-3, which introduces the description of
business resilience in relation to climate change. The actions and resources to mitigate material
risks will lead to residual net risks. The climate risk and scenario analysis/assessments processes
should be done on a gross basis.
Answer
As stated in ESRS E1 paragraph 20, the undertaking shall describe the process to identify and
assess climate-related impacts, risks and opportunities. This assessment refers to gross physical
and transition risks. Gross risks means that the undertaking should not consider the effects of the
actions and resources to mitigate the material risk when assessing it.
When disclosing the information required under ESRS E1 paragraphs 20 (b) and 20 (c), the
undertaking shall explain how it has used climate-related scenario analysis, including a range of
climate scenarios, to inform the identification and assessment of physical risks and transition risks
and opportunities over the short-, medium- and long-term.
The assessment of material climate-related impacts, risks and opportunities is performed looking
at the gross risk, i.e., before any mitigating actions. The same applies to scenario analysis when it
is used to support the identification and materiality assessment of impacts, risks and
opportunities.
When disclosing according to ESRS E1 paragraphs 20 b(ii) and c(ii), consideration should be given
to ESRS 1 paragraph 31 that relevant information is disclosed only on the material risks.
Reference is made to IG 1 Materiality assessment – FAQ 23: Are remediation and mitigation
actions considered in the materiality assessment of environmental impacts? for further
explanation.
ESRS E1-4 Targets related to climate change mitigation and adaptation
Question ID 206 - Climate-related targets
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Is it an absolute requirement in paragraph 30 that 90-95% of GHG emission reduction needs to be
performed before giving the option to work with GHG Removals?
Key Terms
GHG removal, GHG emission reduction
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 81 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 30, 34 and 60; Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms: GHG removal and
storage, and Carbon credit
Background
ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-4 refers to ‘Targets related to climate change mitigation and
adaptation’.
ESRS E1 paragraph 34 (b) states: ‘GHG emission reduction targets shall be disclosed for Scope 1,
2, and 3 GHG emissions, either separately or combined. The undertaking shall specify, in case of
combined GHG emission reduction targets, which GHG emission Scopes (1, 2 and/or 3) are
covered by the target, the share related to each respective GHG emission Scope and which GHGs
are covered. The undertaking shall explain how the consistency of these targets with its GHG
inventory boundaries is ensured (as required by Disclosure Requirement E1-6). The GHG emission
reduction targets shall be gross targets, meaning that the undertaking shall not include GHG
removals, carbon credits or avoided emissions as a means of achieving the GHG emission
reduction targets;’
ESRS E1 paragraph 60 states: ‘In the case where the undertaking discloses a net-zero target in
addition to the gross GHG emission reduction targets in accordance with Disclosure Requirement
E1-4, paragraph 30, it shall explain the scope, methodologies and frameworks applied and how
the residual GHG emissions (after approximately 90-95% of GHG emission reduction with the
possibility for justified sectoral variations in line with a recognised sectoral decarbonisation
pathway) are intended to be neutralised by, for example, GHG removals in its own operations and
upstream and downstream value chain.’
Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms: ‘GHG removal and storage – (anthropogenic) removals
refer to the withdrawal of GHGs from the atmosphere as a result of deliberate human activities.
These include enhancing biological anthropogenic sinks of CO2 and using chemical engineering to
achieve long-term removal and storage. Carbon capture and storage (CCS) from industrial and
energy-related sources, which alone does not remove CO2 from the atmosphere, can remove
atmospheric CO2 if combined with bioenergy production (Bioenergy with Carbon Capture &
Storage – BECCS). Removals can be subject to reversals, which are movements of stored GHG out
of the intended storage that re-enter the atmosphere. For example, if a forest that was grown to
remove a specific amount of CO2 is subject to a wildfire, the emissions captured in the trees are
reversed.’
Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms: ‘Carbon credit – A transferable or tradable instrument
that represents one metric tonne of CO2eq emission reduction or removal issued and verified
according to recognised quality standards.’
Answer
ESRS E1 does not mandate undertakings to work, or prevent them from working, with GHG
removals. While the (extent of) use of carbon removals remains the undertaking’s decision, ESRS
E1 aims at ensuring transparency. It requires to differentiate between:
(a) the established GHG emissions reduction targets (that shall not include carbon removals
per ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-4);
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 82 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
(b) targets related to net-zero (ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-7 paragraph 60, which
requires GHG emission reductions of approximately 90-95%); and
(c) the climate neutrality claims involving carbon credits (ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-
7 paragraph 61).
Undertakings can work with GHG removals before achieving 90-95% GHG emission reductions
near the point of net-zero. If they claim to have set a net-zero target, however, they need to explain
how they expect to neutralise the outstanding residual emissions after a 90-95% of GHG emissions
reduction has been achieved.
ESRS E1-5 Energy consumption and mix
Question ID 36 - Energy mix
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
Does disclosure E1-37 (b) refer to all forms of energy generated from nuclear sources, such as
electricity? Does ESRS E1 paragraph 37 (b) also encompass electricity mixes that include fractions
of nuclear-generated electricity?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-5, ESRS E1 paragraphs AR 34 - 35
Key terms
Energy consumption; nuclear sources
Background
ESRS E1 paragraphs 35 to 37 state:
‘35. The undertaking shall provide information on its energy consumption and mix.
36. The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an understanding of the
undertaking’s total energy consumption in absolute value, improvement in energy efficiency,
exposure to coal, oil and gas-related activities, and the share of renewable energy in its overall
energy mix.
37. The disclosure required by ESRS E1 paragraph 35 shall include the total energy consumption
in MWh related to own operations disaggregated by
(a) total energy consumption from fossil sources;
(b) total energy consumption from nuclear sources; and
(c) total energy consumption from renewable sources disaggregated by
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 83 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
i. fuel consumption for renewable sources, including biomass (also comprising industrial
and municipal waste of biologic origin), biofuels, biogas, hydrogen from renewable
sources, etc. …’
ESRS 2 MDR-M paragraph 77 requires the undertakings to disclose the significant assumptions
behind the metric, including the limitations of the methodologies used.
Answer
ESRS E1 paragraph 37 (b) requires the disclosure of total energy consumption from nuclear
sources.
ESRS E1 paragraph AR32 (d) clarifies that the energy to be reported should refer to ‘final energy
consumption’, which includes energy carriers such as electricity, heat and steam that can be and
are frequently derived from nuclear sources.
An undertaking disclosing on the basis of ESRS 1 paragraph 35 should thus report the final energy
consumption taking into account its energy mix, which may involve proportions of nuclear-
generated electricity, heat, steam, and cooling; fossil-fuel generated electricity, heat, steam,
cooling and fuels; or renewable electricity, heat, steam, cooling and fuels.
This disclosure requires the undertaking to understand from its consumption of electricity which
portions originate from nuclear, fossil or renewables sources. When electricity, heat and steam
are purchased and the mix includes fractions of nuclear-generated electricity, heat, and steam,
these fractions are to be included in the disclosures under ESRS E1 paragraph 37 (b) on total
energy consumption from nuclear sources. The undertaking should use the information available
on the electricity, heat and steam mix to reflect its energy consumption breakdown according to
ESRS E1 paragraph 35 accurately.
Question ID 338 – Activities in high-climate impact sectors
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
How should the sentence ‘associated with activities in high-impact sectors’ be understood? Does
it exclusively refer to the sectors in which the reporting undertaking itself operates?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 38, 40 and AR 36 (c); ESRS 2 paragraphs 40 (b), 40 (c) and AR 13
Key terms
Impact sectors
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 84 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Background
ESRS E1 mentions the Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 Annex I(9) when
referring to the definition of ‘high-climate sectors’.
According to Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 Annex I(9), ‘high-impact climate
sectors’ means the sectors listed in Sections A to H and Section L of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No
1893/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ESRS E1 paragraph 38 states that the undertaking with operations in high-climate impact sectors
shall further disaggregate their total energy consumption from fossil sources by:
(a) fuel consumption from coal and coal products;
(b) fuel consumption from crude oil and petroleum products;
(c) fuel consumption from natural gas;
(d) fuel consumption from other fossil sources; and
(e) consumption of purchased or acquired electricity, heat, steam or cooling from fossil
sources.
ESRS E1 paragraph 40 states that the undertaking shall provide information on the energy
intensity (total energy consumption per net revenue) associated with activities in high-climate
impact sectors.
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 36 (a) provides the calculation formula in which total energy consumption
from activities in high-climate impact sectors is in a numerator while net revenue from activities
in high-climate impact sectors is in a denominator. Moreover, point (c) of this AR clarifies that the
numerator and denominator shall only consist of the proportion of the total final energy
consumption (in the numerator) and net revenue (in the denominator) that are attributable to
activities in high-climate impact sectors. Finally, this point provides that, in effect, there should be
consistency in the scope of both the numerator and denominator.
Answer
According to Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 Annex I(9), high-climate impact
sectors are those listed in NACE Sections A to H and Section L of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No
1893/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council. The list of targeted sections is the
following.
Section A: Agriculture, forestry and fishing (NACE division 01-03)
Section B: Mining and quarrying (NACE division 05-09)
Section C: Manufacturing (NACE division 10-33)
Section D: Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply (NACE division 35)
Section E: Water supply; Sewerage, waste management and remediation activities (NACE
division 36-39)
Section F: Construction (NACE division 41-43)
Section G: Wholesale and retail trade; Repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles (NACE
division 45-47)
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 85 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Section H: Transportation and storage (NACE division 49-53)
Section L: Real estate activities (NACE division 68)
It is important to note that the high-climate impact sectors are determined at the NACE code
activity level (linked to the undertaking’s own operations) and not by the undertaking’s (ESRS)
sector(s) of activity (as defined in ESRS 2 paragraph 40 (b)(c) and AR 13.
ESRS E1-6 Gross scopes 1, 2, 3 and total GHG emissions
Question ID 81 - Subsidiaries and holding company – alignment for
GHG protocol
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
Should all the subsidiaries and the parent company in a consolidated sustainability statement use
the same criteria and methodology for GHG emissions?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 Appendix B Qualitative characteristics of information; ESRS 2 paragraph 77 (a); ESRS E1
paragraphs 50, AR 39 (b), AR 42, and AR 46 (h).
Key terms
GHG protocol; holding companies; alignment in methodology
Background
[The original question submitted: ‘Should the companies of a holding company use the same
criteria and methodology for GHG emissions?’ has been reworded to the above to be clearer.]
ESRS 1 Appendix B, qualitative characteristics of information shall be applied in the preparation
of the ESRS sustainability statement.
ESRS 2 paragraph 77 (a) states: ‘disclose the methodologies and significant assumptions behind
the metric, including the limitations of the methodologies used;’. ESRS E1 paragraph AR 39 (b)
requires the undertaking to: ‘disclose the methodologies, significant assumptions and emissions
factors used to calculate or measure GHG emissions accompanied by the reasons why they were
chosen, and provide a reference or link to any calculation tools used.’ Moreover, ESRS E1
paragraph AR46 (h), on Scope 3 emissions, requires clarity on the boundaries considered and the
methods used for estimating emissions: ‘for each significant Scope 3 GHG category, disclose the
reporting boundaries considered, the calculation methods for estimating the GHG emissions as
well as if and which calculation tools were applied. The Scope 3 categories should be consistent
with the GHGP and include:
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 86 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
(a) indirect Scope 3 GHG emissions from the consolidated accounting group (the parent
and its subsidiaries),
(b) indirect Scope 3 GHG emissions from associates, joint ventures, and unconsolidated
subsidiaries for which the undertaking has the ability to control the operational
activities and relationships (i.e., operational control),
(c) Scope 1, 2 and 3 GHG emissions from associates, joint ventures, unconsolidated
subsidiaries (investment entities) and joint arrangements for which the undertaking
does not have operational control and when these entities are part of the undertaking’s
upstream and downstream value chain.’
All these requirements point to the advantages of using a uniform approach for ease of
understanding and transparency.
Answer
All subsidiaries and their parent undertaking shall apply the requirements of ESRS, including the
qualitative characteristics of information in ESRS 1 Appendix B. The GHG Protocol is the reference
for the calculation of GHG emissions following ESRS E1. The sustainability statement shall include
the methodology and the significant assumptions made by the parent and subsidiaries regarding
GHG emissions, as stated in ESRS E1 paragraph AR 39.
ESRS does not exclude flexibility in the methodologies used by different undertakings in the same
group, provided that the qualitative characteristics of information are met.
A standardised approach from the onset is advantageous for its consistency, comparability,
transparency and the overall integrity of reported GHG emissions.
Deviations from a common methodology can be accepted but should be disclosed, along with the
rationale for their use, to meet the transparency requirements set forth by the ESRS.
Using diverging methodologies for similar or comparable fact patterns can result in information
that may not comply with the qualitative characteristics of information required by the ESRS (ESRS
1, Appendix B).
Question ID 43 - Scope 3 GHG emissions for insurance companies
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
What is the scope of reporting scope 3 greenhouse gas emissions for insurance companies?
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 chapter 3.2 Material matters and material information; ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement
E1-6 – Gross Scopes 1, 2, 3 and Total GHG emissions and related AR;
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 87 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Key terms
Materiality assessment, materiality, relevance; scope 3 GHG emissions, insurance companies,
financial investment
Background
The determination of which categories of Scope 3 greenhouse gas emissions to include in the
sustainability statement is driven by the materiality assessment of the company, namely in the
scope of the analysis of ESRS 1 paragraph 31, which states that ‘The applicable information
prescribed within a Disclosure Requirement, including its datapoints, or an entity-specific
disclosure, shall be disclosed when the undertaking assesses, as part of its assessment of material
information, that the information is relevant from one or more of the following perspectives: (a)
the significance of the information in relation to the matter it purports to depict or explain; or (b)
the capacity of such information to meet the users’ decision-making needs, including the needs
of primary users of general-purpose financial reporting described in paragraph 48 and/or the
needs of users whose principal interest is in information about the undertaking’s impacts.’
If climate change is considered a material topic by the undertaking, insurance companies are
required by ESRS E1 paragraphs 44 and 51 to disclose their gross Scope 3 greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions for each of the Scope 3 categories that they assess to be ‘significant’, encompassing
emissions within their upstream and downstream value chain. This includes emissions over which
the company does not have direct control but that may have a significant impact on its overall
carbon footprint and transition risks, as outlined in ESRS E1 paragraph 45.
In making its evaluation of the ‘significant Scope 3 categories’, the company shall consider, in
accordance with ESRS E1 AR39 (a), the principles, requirements and guidance of the GHG Protocol
Corporate Standard. The GHG Protocol also includes a supplement ‘GHG protocol Corporate Value
Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard’ (also referred to in this document as ‘GHGP
Scope 3 standard’), which makes reference as well to the GHG Protocol ‘Technical Guidance for
calculating Scope 3 Emissions’ (v1.0), a supplement to the GHGP Scope 3 standard.
To be considered: Principle of relevance, as defined in the “GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting
and Reporting Standard” and further articulated in “relevance criteria” by the “GHG protocol
Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard”, as well as the “Technical
Guidance for calculating Scope 3 Emissions”.
The GHG Protocol Scope 3 Category 15 is specifically tailored to financial institutions – which
includes insurance undertakings – and the following financial investments and services are
required to be reported (under the GHG Scope 3 standard, Table 5.9, pp.52): equity investments,
debt investments and project finance.
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 46 states that the financial institution shall consider the GHG Accounting
and Reporting Standard for the Financial Industry from the Partnership for Carbon Accounting
Financial (PCAF), specifically part A ‘Financed Emissions’ (version December 2022).
Answer
When reporting on their gross Scope 3 greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, the undertaking discloses
the amounts corresponding to the Scope 3 categories that it considers significant. For
investments, this will factor in the scale of the investments and the associated indirect GHG
emissions. The company should follow the principles, requirements and guidance laid out in the
GHG Protocol Corporate Standard, the GHGP Scope 3 standard as well as the associated Scope 3
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 88 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
calculation guidance. Moreover, as stated in ESRS E1 paragraph AR 46 (b), financial institutions
shall consider the GHG Accounting and Reporting Standard for the Financial Industry from the
Partnership for Carbon Accounting Financial (PCAF), specifically part A ‘Financed Emissions’
(version December 2022).
Supporting material
https://ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/2022-12/Chapter15.pdf
https://ghgprotocol.org/scope-3-calculation-guidance-2
Question ID 167 - GHG protocol scope 3; sector
Release date
February 2024
Question asked
Is there a requirement for, or guidance around, the methods allowed to calculate Scope 3
emissions from shipping?
Key Terms
Scope 3, value vhain
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 Annex B: qualitative characteristics of information; ESRS E1 paragraphs 44 and AR39, AR46
Background
ESRS 1 Annex B, on qualitative characteristics of information, provides important principles and
criteria to apply in the assessment of which calculation methodologies and which input data to
use in the preparation of ESRS disclosures.
ESRS E1 paragraph 44 requires the disclosure of gross Scope 3 GHG emissions, as well as the other
two Scopes regarding GHG emissions, and ESRS E1 AR39 (a) states that ‘the undertaking shall
consider the principles, requirements and guidance provided by the GHG Protocol Corporate
Standard (version 2004) … ‘, which in this case also includes the GHG Protocol Corporate Value
Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard (Version 2011 mentioned in ESRS E1 AR 46
(a)) as well as the ‘Technical guidance for calculating Scope 3 emissions’ (version 1.0).
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 46 details other requirements related to the reporting of Scope 3 GHG
emissions. In particular, ESRS E1 paragraph AR 46 (g) highlights the need to disclose the
percentage of emissions calculated using primary data obtained from suppliers or other value
chain partners by stating that: ‘disclose the extent to which the undertaking’s Scope 3 GHG
emissions are measured using inputs from specific activities within the entity’s upstream and
downstream value chain, and disclose the percentage of emissions calculated using primary data
obtained from suppliers or other value chain partners.’
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 89 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Other methodological details that go beyond the provisions included in the ‘Technical guidance
for calculating Scope 3 emissions’ (version 1.0) are not provided within the ESRS. Additional
provisions may be envisaged as part of future ESRS sector standards.
Answer
The ESRS set reporting standards but do not prescribe detailed calculation methodologies.
However, when determining the methodology and input to be used, the undertaking shall apply
the criteria defined under ESRS 1 Annex B, qualitative characteristics of information, as well as
requirements to consider the GHG Protocol Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and
Reporting Standard (Version 2011 mentioned in ESRS E1 paragraph AR 46 (a)) and the ‘Technical
guidance for calculating Scope 3 emissions’ (version 1.0). Additional provisions may be envisaged
as part of future ESRS sector standards.
Question ID 208 - GHG emission calculation
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
The undertaking shall disclose in metric tonnes of CO2eq its (a) gross Scope 1 GHG emissions, (b)
gross Scope 2 GHG emissions, (c) gross Scope 3 GHG emissions and (d) total GHG emissions. The
question is, how could this be done? What methodologies should be used and where can they be
found? What exactly are the equivalents for the calculation? Offer interesting, concrete examples.
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 44, and AR 39
Key Terms
GHG emission calculation; ISO; IPCC
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph 44 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose in metric tonnes of CO2eq its:
(a) gross Scope 1 GHG emission,
(b) gross Scope 2 GHG emission,
(c) gross Scope 3 GHG emission; and
(d) total GHG emission’.
ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirements E1-6 – Gross Scopes 1,2,3 and Total GHG emission give some
details on the calculation guidance for GHG emission. ESRS E1 paragraph AR39 states that ‘the
undertaking shall consider the principles, requirements and guidance provided by the GHG
Protocol Corporate Standard (version 2004). The undertaking may consider the Commission
Recommendation (EU) 2021/2279 or the requirements stipulated by EN ISO 14064-1:2018 …’
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 90 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
CO2e is a unit used in GHG accounting that reflects the amount of carbon dioxide (CO2) emission
that would cause the same integrated radiative forcing or temperature change over a given time
horizon as an emitted amount of a greenhouse gas (GHG) or a mixture of GHGs. To calculate
emissions in CO2e, the different Global Warming Potential (GWP) of GHGs should be used. GWPs
are used to evaluate releasing (or avoid releasing) different greenhouse gases on a common basis
– commonly, one tonne of CO2. As per ESRS E1 paragraph AR39, when reporting emissions the
undertaking shall ‘use the most recent Global Warming Potential (GWP) values published by the
IPCC based on a 100-year time horizon to calculate CO2eq emissions of non-CO2 gases’.
Answer
1) How can GHG emissions be calculated and what methodologies can be used?
The undertaking shall consider the principles, requirements and guidance provided by the GHG
Protocol Corporate Standard (version 2004). The undertaking may consider Commission
Recommendation (EU) 2021/2279 or the requirements stipulated by EN ISO 14064-1:2018. This
gives further details on GHG emission calculation guidance.
If further support is needed, the GHG Protocol website also provides further guidance, calculation
tools and online training on GHG accounting.
It is to be noted that ESRS are specifying some of the applications of the GHG protocol, in
particular in respect of operational control (see ESRS E1 paragraphs 46 and 50).
2) What exactly are the CO2 equivalents used for the calculation?
When expressing its GHG emissions, the preparer shall make it in units of Tco2e, using the latest
Global Warming Potential (GWP) values published by the IPCC based on a 100-year time horizon.
CO2eq is the universal unit of measurement to indicate the global warming potential (GWP) of
each greenhouse gas, expressed in terms of the GWP of one unit of carbon dioxide. It is used to
evaluate releasing different greenhouse gases on a common basis. GWP is a factor describing the
radiative forcing impact (degree of harm to the atmosphere) of one unit of a given GHG relative
to one unit of CO2. The current list is the one in the IPCC’s 6th Assessment Report, Chapter 7SM3.
Question ID 251 - Emission factors disclosure
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Does the disclosure of emission factors include the values in, for example, 500 gCO2e/kWh, or is
the description of the emission factor related to the source of the emission factor sufficient? Is
the reporting organisation obliged to make the calculation tools publicly accessible or is only the
access for auditors and EU/national authorities mandatory?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 39 (b)
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 91 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Key Terms
GHG emission factors
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 39 (b) states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the methodologies, significant
assumptions and emissions factors used to calculate or measure GHG emissions accompanied by
the reasons why they were chosen and provide a reference or link to any calculation tools used’.
Answer
Users of information should be able to understand how the GHG inventory figures have been
determined. For these purposes, it may be sufficient to refer to the sources of emission factors
(EF) without providing the actual figures – which could result in too detailed a reporting and
potentially obscure the relevant information. Alternatively, where the EF is a key determinant of
a significant reported figure, it may be useful to disclose the actual values of an emission factor. It
is up to the preparer to make the determination of when it is most appropriate to disclose just
the source of EFs or to disclose the EF value.
Question ID 268 – GHG emissions and annual update
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
I would like to know if corporates need to update and disclose their Gross GHG scopes 1-3 each
year to comply with the ESRS requirements.
ESRS reference
ESRS 1 paragraph 30, 73, 132 and 133 (b); Appendix C (reference to E1-6); ESRS E1 paragraph 44,
AR 46 (f)
Key Terms
GHG emission; annual update
Background
The original question submitted is the following: ‘GHG Emission Gross – scope 1-3— I would like
to know if corporates need to update and disclose their GHG emissions each year to comply with
the CSRD reporting.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 30 provides that when the undertaking concludes that a sustainability matter
is material ‘… it shall: (a) disclose information according to the Disclosure Requirements (including
Application Requirements) related to that specific sustainability matter in the corresponding
topical ESRS …’. ESRS 1 paragraph 73 states: ‘The reporting period for the undertaking’s
sustainability statement shall be consistent with that of its financial statements.’
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 92 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS 1 paragraph 132 states: ‘For the first three years of the undertaking’s sustainability reporting
under the ESRS, in the event that not all the necessary information regarding its upstream and
downstream value chain is available, the undertaking shall explain the efforts made to obtain the
necessary information about its upstream and downstream value chain, the reasons why not all
of the necessary information could be obtained, and its plans to obtain the necessary information
in the future.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 133 states: ‘For the first three years of its sustainability reporting under the
ESRS …
(b) when disclosing metrics, the undertaking is not required to include upstream and
downstream value chain information, except for datapoints derived from other EU
legislation, as listed in ESRS 2 Appendix B.’
This appendix includes Scope 1-3 and total emissions.
ESRS 1 Appendix C: List of phased-in Disclosure Requirements includes reference to E1-6
Disclosure Requirement, indicating that undertakings or groups not exceeding on their balance
sheet dates the average number of 750 employees during the financial year (on a consolidated
basis where applicable) may omit the datapoints on Scope 3 emissions and total GHG emissions
for the first year of preparation of their sustainability statement.
ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-6 paragraph 44 requires the undertaking to disclose its gross
Scope 1, Scope 2, Scope 3 and total GHG emissions. With respect to the Scope 3, ESRS E1
paragraph AR 46 (f) requires updating Scope 3 GHG emissions in each significant category every
year on the basis of current activity data and updating the full Scope 3 GHG inventory at least
every three years or on the occurrence of a significant event or significant change in the
circumstances.
Answer
An undertaking shall disclose and update their Gross Scopes 1, 2, 3 and Total GHG emissions on
an annual basis (consistent with financial statements, as per ESRS 1 paragraph 73) and in
accordance with the provisions of ESRS 1 and ESRS E1-6.
With regard to Scope 3 GHG emissions more specifically, the update of Scope 3 GHG emissions in
each significant category shall occur every year on the basis of current activity data; the update
of the full Scope 3 GHG inventory is required at least every three years or on the occurrence of a
significant event or a significant change in circumstances (see ESRS E1 paragraph AR 46 (f)).
Question ID 414 – Disaggregation of total emissions
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Should ESRS E1 paragraph AR 48 including the table for disaggregating total emissions be
interpreted as a mandate that all disclosers use the given table (as suggested using ‘shall’)? If so,
could the meaning of the columns be more clearly specified?
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 93 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 48
Key terms
Total emissions
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 48 states that the undertaking shall disclose its total GHG emissions
disaggregated by Scopes 1 and 2 and significant Scope 3 in accordance with the table below.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 94 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
The retrospective columns concern historical data. The base year is the historical reference date
or period for which information is available and against which subsequent information can be
compared over time, as stated in ESRS 1 Chapter 6.3 Reporting progress against the base year.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 95 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 25 requires that when setting new targets the undertaking select a recent
base year that does not precede the first reporting year of the new target period by more than
three years. For example, for 2030 as the target year and a target period between 2025 and 2030,
the base year shall be selected from the period between 2022 and 2025. For the following five-
year period, the base year should be 2030. If early reductions have been achieved, these should
be explained in another table or by adding new columns. Further explanations are available at ID
531 GHG emission reduction targets – base year.
ESRS 1 Chapter 7.1 Presenting comparative information states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose
comparative information in respect of the previous period for all quantitative metrics and
monetary amounts disclosed in the current period.’ That is, the undertaking shall present previous
reporting year data for comparison purposes in the third ‘comparative’ column.
In column N (fourth column), the undertaking presents the current reporting year figures, and in
the fifth column it shall present the percentage reduction / increase of the value in the current
year over the previous year.
The milestones and target years columns are for reporting target information for the years 2025,
2030 and 2050 (if available). It is suggested to include all target values between 2035 and 2050
that the undertaking has set by using the column ‘2050’ as a placeholder for those targets or by
adding more columns to the table as applicable – given the requirement in ESRS E1 paragraph 34
(d) to update the target year every five years from 2030 onwards. Finally, the ninth column is for
reporting the average annual emission reduction figure by using the following formula:
𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟
1−
𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟
𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 =
𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟−𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟
Answer
Yes, the undertaking is required to disclose its total GHG emissions disaggregated by Scopes 1 and
2 and significant Scope 3 in accordance with the table provided in ESRS E1 paragraph AR 48. Note
that the undertaking is only required to fill the cells of the table that are applicable to the
undertaking, meaning that for Scope 3 only significant categories (see ESRS E1 paragraph AR 46)
are to be disclosed and that the cells under ‘Milestones and target years’ are to be filled according
to the targets set by the undertaking.
The columns of the table are the following:
The base year: for reporting the value of the metric in the base year against which progress
towards the target is measured
Comparative year: for reporting the previous year’s (compared to the reporting year’s)
value for the metric
N: the value for the metric in the current year
% N/N-1: percentage reduction / increase from previous year
2025: value of target for the metric in year 2025
2030: value of target for the metric in year 2030
(2050): value of interim targets set for the metric in the years between 2035 and 2050
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 96 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Annual % target / base year: report on the average annual emission reduction figure
achieved so far by using the following formula:
𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟
1−
𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 .
𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟−𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟
Question ID 535 – Emission trading schemes
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Is there a clear definition or exhaustive list of ‘regulated Emission Trading Schemes’?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 48 (b) and AR 44
Key terms
Emission trading schemes
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph 48 states: ‘The disclosure on gross Scope 1 GHG emissions required by
paragraph 44 (a) shall include:
(a) the gross Scope 1 GHG emissions in metric tonnes of CO2eq; and
(b) the percentage of Scope 1 GHG emissions from regulated emission trading schemes.’
The related ESRS E1 paragraph AR 44 states: ‘When preparing the information on the percentage
of Scope 1 GHG emissions from regulated emission trading schemes required under paragraph 48
(b), the undertaking shall:
(a) consider GHG emissions from the installations it operates that are subject to regulated
Emission Trading Schemes (ETS), including the EU-ETS, national ETS and non-EU ETS, if
applicable;
(b) only include emissions of CO2, CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs, SF6 and NF3;
(c) ensure the same accounting period for gross Scope 1 GHG emissions and GHG emissions
regulated under the ETS; and
(d) calculate the share by using the following formula:
GHG Emissions in (t CO2eq) from EU ETS installations + national ETS installations + non EU ETS installations
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 97 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Scope 1 GHG emissions (t CO2eq)’
CDP provides a list of ETS’s around the world that can be found in the guidance to question ‘3.5.2
– Provide details of each Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) your organization is regulated by’ of
‘CDP Full Corporate Questionnaire’ (version May 2024).
Answer
The undertaking shall consider GHG emissions from the installations it operates that are subject
to regulated Emission Trading Schemes (ETS), including the EU-ETS, national ETS and non-EU ETS,
if applicable (ESRS E1 AR 44). The schemes that fall under this requirement, therefore, include not
only EU ETS but those regulated ETS which are either upcoming and/or non-EU trading schemes.
Only emissions of CO , CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs, SF6 and NF3 shall be included. Separate ETS for
2
other greenhouse gases do not have to be included. Currently, there is no clear definition or
exhaustive list of ‘regulated Emission Trading Schemes’. CDP provides an indicative, non-
exhaustive list of ETS around the world, showing examples of ETS. The list is the following:
Alberta TIER – ETS
Australia ERF Safeguard Mechanism – ETS
Austria – ETS
BC GGIRCA – ETS
Beijing pilot ETS
California CaT – ETS
Canada federal OBPS – ETS
China national ETS
Chongqing pilot ETS
EU ETS
Fujian pilot ETS
Germany ETS
Guangdong pilot ETS
Hubei pilot ETS
Indonesia ETS
Kazakhstan ETS
Korea ETS
Massachusetts state ETS
Mexico pilot ETS
Montenegro ETS
New Brunswick ETS
New Zealand ETS
Newfoundland and Labrador PSS – ETS
Nova Scotia CaT – ETS
Ontario EPS – ETS
Oregon ETS
Québec CaT – ETS
RGGI – ETS
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 98 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Saitama ETS
Sakhalin ETS
Saskatchewan OBPS – ETS
Shanghai pilot ETS
Shenzhen pilot ETS
Switzerland ETS
Tianjin pilot ETS
Tokyo CaT – ETS
UK ETS
Vietnam ETS
Washington CAR – ETS
Question ID 698 – Database for GHG emission factors
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Is it allowed to use OEKOBAUDAT data after EN 15804 to report GHG emissions within the ESRS?
Within ESRS, the Commission Recommendation (EU) 2021/2279 is allowed to use and indicate
the use of Environmental Footprint EF v3.1 impact categories. On the JRC website, it seems as if
EF v.3.1 impact categories and EN 15804 impact categories are harmonised. Does this mean that
these two impact categories (EF V3.1 and OEKOBAUDAT) can be used? Can they be summed up
when reporting after (EU) 2021/2279?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 39
Key terms
GHG emissions; impact categories; GHG emission factor database
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 39 states: ‘When preparing the information for reporting GHG emissions
as required by paragraph 44, the undertaking shall:
(a) consider the principles, requirements and guidance provided by the GHG Protocol
Corporate Standard (version 2004) [and] may consider Commission Recommendation
(EU) 2021/2279 or the requirements stipulated by EN ISO 14064-1:2018. If the
undertaking already applies the GHG accounting methodology of ISO 14064-1: 2018, it
shall nevertheless comply with the requirements of this standard (e.g. regarding
reporting boundaries and the disclosure of market-based Scope 2 GHG emissions) … and
(d) use the most recent Global Warming Potential (GWP) values published by the IPCC based
on a 100-year time horizon to calculate Co2eq emissions of non-Co2 gases.’
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 99 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
The ÖKOBAUDAT platform is offered as a standardised database for ecological evaluations of
buildings by the German Federal Ministry for Housing, Urban Development and Building.
The EN 15804 is the Environmental Product Declaration (EPD) standard for the sustainability of
construction works and services. This standard harmonises the structure of EPDs in the
construction sector, making the information transparent and comparable. Under EN 15804 the
impact category ‘climate change total’ relates to total GHG emissions calculated on the basis of a
Global Warming Potential of 100 years (GWP100), which is consistent with ESRS E1 paragraph
AR 39 (d).
Nevertheless, EN 15084 is a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) standard, which may give rise to some
inconsistencies with the application of a yearly annual inventory approach, such as the one
adopted in corporate sustainability reporting.
Answer
When reporting on its GHG emissions, the requirements set out in ESRS E1 need to be met.
According to ESRS E1, an undertaking shall consider the GHG Protocol Corporate Standard
(version 2004) and, in addition, it may also consider Commission Recommendation (EU)
2021/2279 or the requirements stipulated by EN ISO 14064-1:2018. Neither the GHG Protocol
Corporate Standard, the EN ISO 14064-1 nor EN 15804 have specific norms on the adequacy of
emission factors for specific uses within an inventory calculation. These issues are largely assessed
through professional judgment, which may include asking for external professional advice that
could help determine the applicability of any given emission factor to a specific calculation case.
Question ID 718 – Disaggregation of GHG emissions
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
It seems like in the disclosure requirements there is no distinction in GHG emissions based on
fossil resources and non-fossil resources. Why is this, and would EFRAG recommend to emphasise
this difference in CSRD-reporting anyway?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 37, AR 39, AR 41, AR 43; ESRS 1 paragraph 55
Key terms
GHG emissions, disaggregation
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 100 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 41 states: ‘In line with ESRS 1 chapter 3.7, the undertaking shall
disaggregate information on its GHG emissions as appropriate. For example, the undertaking may
disaggregate its Scope 1, 2, 3, or total GHG emissions by country, operating segments, economic
activity, subsidiary, GHG category (CO2, CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs, SF6, NF3, and other GHG
considered by the undertaking) or source type (stationary combustion, mobile combustion,
process emissions and fugitive emissions).’
ESRS 1 chapter 3.7 refers to the level of disaggregation applied to support a proper understanding
of the material impacts, risks and opportunities of an undertaking. Specifically, ESRS 1 chapter 3.7
paragraph 55 states: ‘When defining the appropriate level of disaggregation for reporting, the
undertaking shall consider the disaggregation adopted in its materiality assessment.’
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 39 states: ‘When preparing the information for reporting GHG emissions
as required by paragraph 44, the undertaking shall:
(a) consider the principles, requirements and guidance provided by the GHG Protocol Corporate
Standard (version 2004) …’
ESRS E1 paragraph 37 requires a breakdown of energy consumption between fossil, nuclear and
renewable sources. Given that CO2 emissions are often associated with energy consumption, E1-
5 can provide an indication on the fossil origin of emissions.
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 43 requires a disclosure on biogenic emissions of CO emissions from the
2
combustion or biodegradation of biomass separately from Scope 1 GHG emissions, ESRS E1
paragraph AR 45 requires it separately from Scope 2 GHG emissions and ESRS E1 paragraph AR 46
separately from Scope 3 GHG emissions.
Answer
ESRS E1 paragraphs AR 43, 45 and 46 require disclosure of biogenic emissions of CO emissions
2
from the combustion or biodegradation of biomass separately from the Scope 1, 2 and 3 GHG
emissions.
In addition, the undertaking shall disaggregate the reported information when needed to support
a proper understanding of its material impacts, risks and opportunities (ESRS 1 chapter 3.7 Level
of disaggregation). It shall disaggregate information on its GHG emissions as appropriate (ESRS
E1 paragraph AR 41). Therefore, the undertaking shall disaggregate its GHG emissions by the
distinction between fossil and non-fossil resources if considered necessary for the understanding
of the impacts, risks and opportunities linked to these emissions. As stated by ESRS 1 chapter 3.7
paragraph 55, the level of disaggregation used is the one adopted in the undertaking’s materiality
assessment.
Also, ESRS E1-5 paragraph 37 requires a breakdown of energy consumption between fossil,
nuclear and renewable sources. Given that CO emissions are often associated with energy
2
consumption, ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-5 will often provide a reliable indication on the
fossil origin of an undertaking’s emissions.
Overall, when calculating and reporting on GHG emissions, ESRS E1 paragraph AR 39 (a) states
that the undertaking shall consider the principles, requirements and guidance provided by the
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 101 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
GHG Protocol Corporate Standard (version 2004). ESRS do not specify these further but refer to
the GHG Protocol.
See also answers to ID 81 – Subsidiaries, holding company – alignment for GHG Protocol and
ID 167 – GHG Protocol Scope 3. These explanations elaborate on the relationship between the
ESRS and the GHG Protocol as a methodology and for Scope 3 emissions.
ESRS E1-7 GHG removals and GHG mitigation projects financed through
carbon credits
Question ID 432 – Net zero target and GHG removals
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
ESRS E1 paragraph 60 mentions the words ‘after approximately 90-95% of GHG reduction’.
1) Does this mean that under ESRS my claim to net-zero will not be recognised if I neutralise 20%
of my total reduction target to reach net-zero through removal techniques?
2) Is capturing and storing CO emitted through my own operations considered to be ‘reduction’
2
or ‘removal’?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 60 and 56 (a); Annex II Acronyms and Defined Terms: Net-zero target, GHG
removal and storage
Key terms
Net-zero targets, GHG removals
Background
Regarding the net-zero target, ESRS E1 paragraph 60 states: ‘In the case where the undertaking
discloses a net-zero target in addition to the gross GHG emission reduction targets in accordance
with Disclosure Requirement E1-4 paragraph 30, [the undertaking] shall explain the scope,
methodologies and frameworks applied and how the residual GHG emissions (after
approximately 90-95% of GHG emission reduction, with the possibility for justified sectoral
variations in line with a recognised sectoral decarbonisation pathway) are intended to be
neutralised by, for example, GHG removals in its own operations and upstream and downstream
value chain.’
Annex II Acronyms and Defined Terms defines net-zero target: ‘Setting a net-zero target at the
level of an undertaking aligned with meeting societal climate goals means (1) achieving a scale of
value chain emissions reductions consistent with the depth of abatement at the point of reaching
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 102 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
global net-zero in 1.5˚C pathways, and (2) neutralising the impact of any residual emissions (after
approximately 90-95% of GHG emission reduction) by permanently removing an equivalent
volume of CO .’
2
Regarding GHG removals, ESRS E1 paragraph 56 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose:
(a) GHG removals and storage in metric tonnes of CO resulting from projects it may have
2eq
developed in its own operations or contributed to in its upstream and downstream value
chain …’.
Annex II Acronyms and Defined Terms defines GHG removal and storage: ‘[Anthropogenic]
Removals refer to the withdrawal of GHGs from the atmosphere as a result of deliberate human
activities. These include enhancing biological sinks of CO and using chemical engineering to
2
achieve long-term removal and storage.’
Carbon capture and storage (CCS) from industrial and energy-related sources, which alone does
not remove CO from the atmosphere, can reduce atmospheric CO if it is combined with
2 2
bioenergy production (BECCS). Removals can be subject to reversals, which are any movement of
stored GHG out of the intended storage that re-enters the surface and atmosphere. For example,
if a forest that was grown to remove a specific amount of CO is subject to a wildfire, the emissions
2
captured in the trees are reversed.
The European Commission refers to this process as follows: ‘Capturing carbon dioxide directly
from the atmosphere (DACCS) or from the combustion or fermentation of biogenic carbon
(BECCS) has the potential to achieve negative emissions (carbon removals). The captured carbon
is subsequently either stored underground or utilized in the production of synthetic materials
such as fuels, chemicals, and building materials’ (see here for more information). For storage, CO
2
is captured from its source and compressed and transported to geological formations, including
oil and gas reservoirs, unmendable coal seams and deep saline reservoirs where it will be stored.
Answer
1) Does this mean that under ESRS my claim to net-zero will not be recognised if I
neutralise 20% of my total reduction target to reach net-zero through removal
techniques?
Net-zero target means neutralising the impact of any residual emissions (after approximately 90-
95% of GHG emission reduction) by permanently removing an equivalent volume of CO (see the
2
definition of net-zero target above). As such, neutralising more than 10% (e.g. 20%, as stated in
the question) of carbon removals would not qualify to a claim of achieving a net-zero target in
accordance with the ESRS definition. As stated in ESRS E1 paragraph 60, the 90-95% of GHG
emission reduction is subject to sectoral variations, which may be reflected in the undertaking’s
net-zero target.
2) Is capturing and storing CO emitted through my own operations considered to be
2
‘reduction’ or ‘removal’?
Please refer to the above definition of GHG removal and storage to determine whether or not
capturing and storing CO emitted through the undertaking’s operations would qualify as
2
removal. It will be considered a removal if it results in the withdrawal of GHG from the
atmosphere as a consequence of deliberate human activity (such as, for example, BECCS or
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 103 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
carbon stored in soil through enhanced agriculture practices). It should be noted that all carbon
capture and storage technologies have adverse effects that should be considered.
If an undertaking is capturing and storing CO2 that it has emitted through its own operations, this
does not necessarily represent a removal. If the carbon is of fossil origin, it may represent a
transfer of CO2 into geological storage (see article 49 of Commission Implementing Regulation
2018/2066 of 19 December 2018), and for the purposes of ESRS Disclosure Requirement E1-6 –
Gross Scopes 1, 2, 3 and Total GHG emissions reporting, an emission reduction. In all cases –
whether removals or transfers of fossil CO – there needs to be a policy to monitor reversals from
2
the storage pools (geological or otherwise). In case of reversals of removals (ESRS E1 paragraph
AR 58 (g)) or transfers of fossil CO , it shall be accounted as a CO emission under ESRS E1
2 2
Disclosure Requirement E1-6. Removal reversals may also be reported in a separate line item, as
per ESRS E1 paragraph AR 60.
Question ID 536 – Carbon credit – Quality standards
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Which are the recognised quality standards meant in the following sentence? ‘(a) the total
amount of carbon credits outside the undertaking’s value chain in metric tonnes of CO2eq that
are verified against recognised quality standards and cancelled in the reporting period.’ Are we
here talking about: option (1) the voluntary standards for carbon offsetting schemes such as Gold
Standard or VCR, option (2) Mandatory Clean Development Mechanisms or option (3) Voluntary
Electricity Attributes Certificates?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 59 and AR 61, AR 63; Annex II List of Acronyms and Defined Terms
Key terms
Carbon credits, quality standards for carbon credits
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph 59 states: ‘The disclosure on carbon credits required by paragraph 56 (b) shall
include, if applicable:
(a) the total amount of carbon credits outside the undertaking’s value chain in metric tonnes
of CO2eq that are verified against recognised quality standards and cancelled in the
reporting period; and …’
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 61 states: ‘Financing GHG emission reduction projects outside the
undertaking’s value chain through purchasing carbon credits that fulfil high-quality standards can
be a useful contribution towards mitigating climate change. This Standard requires the
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 104 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
undertaking to disclose whether it uses carbon credits separately from the GHG emissions
(paragraphs 56 (b) and 59) and GHG emission reduction targets (Disclosure Requirement E1-4). It
also requires the undertaking to show the extent of use and which quality criteria it uses for those
carbon credits.’
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 63 states: ‘When preparing the information on carbon credits required
under paragraphs 56 (b) and 59, the undertaking shall:
(a) Consider recognised quality standards …’
Annex II List of Acronyms and Defined Terms defines ‘Recognised quality standard for carbon
credits’: ‘Recognised quality standards for carbon credits are those that are verifiable by
independent third parties, make requirements and project reports publicly available and at a
minimum ensure additionality, permanence, avoidance of double counting and provide rules for
calculation, monitoring, and verification of the project’s GHG emissions and removals.’
Annex II List of Acronyms and Defined Terms defines ‘carbon credits’: ‘A carbon credit is a
convertible and transferable instrument representing GHG emissions that have been reduced,
avoided or removed through projects that are verified according to recognised quality standards.
Carbon credits can be issued from projects within (sometimes referred to as insets) or outside an
undertaking’s value chain (sometimes referred to as offsets).’
Answer
As stated in ESRS E1 paragraph 63, the undertaking shall consider recognised quality standards
when preparing information on carbon credits. There is currently no list of recognised quality
standards for carbon credit recognised by the EU or recommended by EFRAG. The definition of
recognised quality standard for carbon credit, detailed in the Annex II List of Acronyms and
Defined Terms, enumerates a list of criteria that need to be met:
(a) must be verifiable by independent third parties; and
(b) make requirements and project reports publicly available and at a minimum ensure:
a. additionality,
b. permanence,
c. avoidance of double counting and provide rules for calculation,
d. monitoring, and
e. verification of the project’s GHG emissions and removals.
As long as those criteria are met, an undertaking can consider the carbon credit as a recognised
quality standard for carbon credit.
Question ID 577 – GHG removals – Project definitions
Release date
July 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 105 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Question asked
What is the definition of ‘projects’ in ESRS E1 paragraph 56 (a)? Is this related to investments /
asset-driven initiatives which establish a new facility, process, technology and the like?
Reference
ESRS E1 paragraph 56
Key terms
GHG removals; project definition
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph 56 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose:
(a) GHG removals and storage in metric tonnes of CO2eq resulting from projects it may have
developed in its own operations, or contributed to in its upstream and downstream value
chain …’
In accordance with the GHG Protocol for Project Accounting, a project is ‘A specific activity or set
of activities intended to reduce GHG emissions, increase the storage of carbon, or enhance GHG
removals from the atmosphere. A GHG project may be a stand-alone project, or a component of
a larger non-GHG project.’
Answer
In the context of ESRS E1 paragraph 56 (a), projects are all activities/interventions conducted by
the undertaking which may lead to GHG removals and storage. This is consistent with the project
definition provided in the GHG Protocol for Project Accounting (which does not only refer to GHG
removals; see ‘Background’). It is not limited to asset-driven investments although projects in
own operations may imply new asset investments or new investments in existing assets. Projects
also encompass, for instance, new application for products. Examples of GHG removal projects
include reforestation/afforestation, soil carbon enhancement, ecological restoration, blue carbon
removals, integration of bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS) technologies and
Direct Air Capture of CO2 with storage (DACCS). Projects will usually test new concepts,
technologies or products within the operating context of the company and have both a novelty
component as well as a transitory nature – the related activity is operated as a project for a certain
limited period.
Question ID 636 – Definition of types of removals
Release date
July 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 106 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Question asked
What are, or where can I find, the definitions of ‘biogenic removal and storage’, ‘removal and
storage from land use’, ‘technological removal and storage’ and ‘hybrid removal and storage’?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 58
Key terms
Removals, biogenic; removal and storage of land use; technological removal and storage; removal,
hybrid and storage
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 58 states: ‘When preparing the information on GHG removals and storage
from the undertaking’s own operations and its upstream and downstream value chain required
under paragraphs 56 (a) and 58, the undertaking shall:
(a) consider, as far as applicable, the GHG Protocol Corporate Standard (version 2004),
Product Standard (version 2011), Agriculture Guidance (version 2014), land use, land-use
change, and forestry guidance for GHG project accounting (version 2006); …’
The GHG Protocol Product Life Cycle Accounting and Reporting Standard defines ‘biogenic’ as
‘Produced by living organisms or biological processes, but not fossilized or from fossil sources’.
The ESRS Glossary defines ‘Land use (change)’ as ‘The human use of a specific area for a certain
purpose (such as residential, agriculture, recreation, industrial, etc.) influenced by, but not
synonymous with, land cover. Land-use change refers to a change in the use or management of
land by humans, which may lead to a change in land cover.’
The ESRS Glossary defines ‘GHG removal and storage’: ‘[Anthropogenic] Removals refer to the
withdrawal of GHGs from the atmosphere as a result of deliberate human activities. These include
enhancing biological sinks of CO and using chemical engineering to achieve long-term removal
2
and storage. Carbon capture and storage (CCS) from industrial and energy-related sources, which
alone does not remove CO in the atmosphere, can reduce atmospheric CO2 if it is combined with
2
bioenergy production (BECCS). Removals can be subject to reversals, which are any movement of
stored GHG out of the intended storage that re-enters the surface and atmosphere. For example,
if a forest that was grown to remove a specific amount of CO is subject to a wildfire, the emissions
2
captured in the trees are reversed’.
The provisional agreement for a carbon removals and carbon farming (CRCF) Regulation by the
European Parliament and the Council of the EU reached on 20 February 2024 defines ‘biogenic
carbon pool’ as ‘living biomass, litter, dead wood, dead organic matter, mineral soils and organic
soils as set out in points (a) to (f) of Part B of Annex I to Regulation 2018/841 ...’.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 107 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Answer
Based on the GHG Protocol Corporate Standard (version 2004), the Product LCA and Reporting
Standard (version 2011), Agriculture Guidance (version 2014) and Land use, land-use change, and
forestry Guidance for GHG project accounting (version 2006), the following definitions can be
derived.
(a) Biogenic removal and storage refers to GHG removal and storage as defined in ESRS,
which is classified as biogenic. This is produced by living organisms or biological processes
but not by fossilized or from fossil sources. One example is forest restoration. For a
detailed explanation of ‘biogenic’, the undertaking can refer to the GHG Protocol (e.g.
GHG Product LCA and Reporting standard: ‘Biogenic removals are due to the uptake of
CO by biogenic materials during photosynthesis, while non-biogenic removals only occur
2
if CO is removed from the atmosphere by a non-biogenic product during its production
2
or use stage …’.
(b) Removal and storage from land use refers to GHG removal and storage as defined in ESRS
resulting from land-use, which is defined, too, in ESRS (see background). Additionally,
ESRS E1 AR 57 (b) provides examples of such activities (afforestation, reforestation, forest
restoration, urban tree planting, agroforestry, building soil carbon). Also, the undertaking
can refer to the GHG Product LCA and Reporting standard (2011) and the GHG Protocol
for Project Accounting standard (2005) that speaks to GHG removals due to land-use
change.
(c)Technological removal and storage refers to GHG removal and storage as defined in ESRS,
which results from use of technology. Such activities may resemble examples provided in
ESRS E1 AR 57 (b) (direct air capture). The undertaking may refer to Annex A in the (draft)
GHG Protocol Land Sector and Removals Guidance for additional information.
(d) Hybrid removal and storage refers to GHG removal and storage as defined in ESRS, which
results from combining the use of technology with biogenic removals. ESRS E1 AR 57 (b)
provides an example of this activity (bioenergy with CO2 capture and storage).
Undertakings interested in carbon removals and carbon farming are also advised to check the
provisional agreement reached on 20 February 2024 by the European Parliament and the Council
of the EU for a Carbon Removals and Carbon Farming (CRCF) Regulation.
ESRS E1-9 Anticipated financial effects from material physical and transition
risks and potential climate-related opportunities
Question ID 422 – Assets at risk and disclosure of monetary amount
Release date
July 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 108 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Question asked
Is the disclosure of monetary amount and proportion of assets at risk over the short-/medium-
/long-term meant to be broken down by the time horizon (short-/medium-/long-term) or by a
single aggregate number for assets at risk in any of those time horizons?
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraphs 66 and 67, AR 70 and AR 73
Key terms
Assets at risk
Background
ESRS E1 paragraph 66 states: ‘The disclosure of anticipated financial effects from material physical
risks required by paragraph 64 (a) shall include:
(a) the monetary amount and proportion (percentage) of assets at material physical risk over
the short-, medium- and long-term before considering climate change adaptation actions,
with the monetary amounts of these assets disaggregated by acute and chronic physical
risk …’
ESRS E1 paragraph 67 states: ‘The disclosure of anticipated financial effects from material
transition risks required by paragraph 64 (b) shall include: …
(b) the monetary amount and proportion (percentage) of assets at material transition risk over
the short-, medium- and long-term before considering climate mitigation actions.’
As stated in both articles, the undertaking shall disclose the monetary amount and proportion of
assets at risk considering the different time horizons (short-, medium- and long-term). Guidance
on how to calculate these figures can be found in ESRS E1 paragraph AR 70 to AR 76, which clarify
that the proportion can be done as a single amount or range.
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 70 (a) states: ‘The estimate of monetary amounts and proportion of assets
at physical risk may be presented as either a single amount or range.’
ESRS E1 paragraph AR 73 (a) states: ‘… an estimate of the amount of potentially stranded assets
(in monetary amounts and as a proportion/percentage) from the reporting year until 2030 and
from 2030 to 2050 … may be expressed as a range of asset values based on different climate and
policy scenarios …’.
Answer
ESRS E1 paragraphs 66 and 67 do not require a breakdown of monetary amount figures by the
three time horizons. It rather requires the disclosure of a monetary amount that is the result of
cumulative financial effects assessed for each of the time horizons (short-, medium- and long-
term).
For example, the undertaking shall evaluate the assets at material physical risk considering short-
, medium- and long-term physical climate risks. As the time span increases, the likelihood of
certain climate events impacting the assets is also expected to increase – either because the
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 109 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
events become more frequent or because the period for which they can materialise has become
larger. For this reason, when doing the analysis from the short- to long-term perspective, more
assets are likely to be impacted. These are then accounted for with the carrying value in the
financial statement at the reporting date (ESRS E1 paragraph AR 70), and their carrying value is
added up to a single amount and reported for each of the time horizons (short-, medium- and
long-term). To provide more contextual information, the undertaking may disclose the expected
carrying value of the assets at the time when the climate effect will materialise, taking into
account the amortisation schedule. When identifying the amount and share of current assets that
may be at risk, the time horizons (short-, medium- and long-term) should be considered. If
applying different scenarios or if there is higher uncertainty on assets at risk in the medium- or
long-term, the disclosure can be provided as a range (ESRS E1 paragraphs AR 70 (a) and 73 (a)). A
breakdown by time horizon is not required but may be reported.
When reporting this information, preparers can consider the proportionality principle.
Information on climate-related risks over the long-term is useful for giving direction. However,
while the likelihood of certain climate events can be expected to increase over time, long-term
climate information remains uncertain in varying degrees. It is, therefore, difficult for an
undertaking to anticipate and adapt financially beyond five to ten years both credibly and
verifiably. Consequently, the quality and purpose differ between short-term and long-term
information.
Question ID 555 – Financial effects and climate risk
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
Please provide more clarity around the requirement to report the anticipated financial effects
from chronic and acute physical risks in relation to climate change. The CSRD and ESRS language
is not very clear on whether the requirement is to report the financial effects of the expected
damage and loss from chronic and acute physical risk or to simply report the monetary amount
of the values of the assets themselves that are exposed to chronic and acute physical risk.
ESRS reference
ESRS E1 paragraph 66 (a); ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1-9
Key terms
Financial materiality; climate risk; financial effects
Background
The question that was originally submitted, which was edited for clarity, is the following: ‘I would
like to ask to provide more clarity around the requirement to report monetary impact from chronic
and acute climate risks. The CSRD and ESRS language is not very clear if the requirement is to
report the monetary impact of the expected damage&loss from chronic and acute aspects, or if it
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 110 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
is simply amount reporting the monetary amount of the values of the assets themselves that see
chronic or acute exposure.’
ESRS E1 paragraph 66 states: ‘The disclosure of anticipated financial effects from material physical
risks required by paragraph 64 (a) shall include … the monetary amount and proportion
(percentage) of assets at material physical risk over the short-, medium- and long-term before
considering climate change adaptation actions, with the monetary amounts of these assets
disaggregated by acute and chronic physical risk.’
The related ESRS E1 paragraph AR 70 states: ‘When preparing the information on assets at
material physical risk that is required to be disclosed under paragraph 66 (a), the undertaking
shall:
(a) calculate the assets at material physical risk in terms of monetary amount and as a
proportion (percentage) of total assets at the reporting date (i.e. the proportion is an
estimate of the carrying value of assets at material physical risk divided by total
carrying value as stated in the statement of financial position or balance sheet). The
estimate of assets at material physical risk shall be derived starting from the assets
recognised in the financial statements ... To contextualise this information, the
undertaking shall:
i. disclose the location of its significant assets at material physical risk. Significant
assets located in the EU territory shall be aggregated by NUTS codes 3 level
digits (Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics). For significant assets
located outside the EU territory, the breakdown by NUTS code will only be
provided where applicable …
(c) to contextualise this information, the undertaking shall: …
ii. disaggregate the monetary amounts of assets at risk by acute and chronic
physical risk.’
The ESRS E1 AR 70 (c) (i) (ii) is consistent with the requirements included in Commission
Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2453 Template 5: Banking book – Climate change physical
risk: Exposures subject to physical risk, which states that ‘Institutions shall disclose the gross
carrying amount of exposures sensitive to impact from chronic climate-change events only,
including hazards relating to gradual changes in weather and climate and having a possible impact
on economic output and productivity [as well as] the gross carrying amount of exposures sensitive
to impact from acute climate change events only, including hazards that may cause sudden
damage to properties, disruption of supply chains, and depreciation of assets [and] the gross
carrying amount subject to impact from both chronic and acute climate change events …’.
Answer
The undertaking is required to report the monetary amount of the assets that are exposed to
impact from chronic and/or acute climate change events. This provides a measure of exposure to
climate risks. The intention is not to report the monetary amount of the expected damage and
loss from the chronic and acute aspects, which would be more complex and uncertain to estimate.
The requirement to disaggregate the monetary amounts of assets by acute and chronic physical
risk (see ESRS E1 paragraph 66 (a)) stems from the requirements detailed by the Commission
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 111 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/2453 Template 5: Banking book – Climate change physical
risk: Exposures subject to physical risk (note that this regulation uses the term ‘financial impact’).
This regulation states that the undertaking is required to disclose:
(a) the gross carrying amount of exposures sensitive to impact from chronic climate-change
events;
(b) the gross carrying amount of exposures sensitive to impact from acute climate change
events; and
(c) the gross carrying amount subject to impact from both chronic and acute climate change
events.
ESRS E2 Pollution
ESRS E2 Pollution
ESRS E2-1 Policies related to pollution
Question ID 186 – Substances of very high concern
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
One of the requirements in the ESRS E2 Pollution Standard is to describe the phase-out of
substances of very high concern (SVHCs). How can undertakings identify SVHCs that are to be
phased out?
ESRS reference
ESRS E2 paragraph 6; Disclosure Requirement E2-1 paragraph 15 (b)
Key terms
Substances of very high concern; SVHCs
Background
Disclosure Requirement E2-1 mandates that the undertaking disclose how its policies address the
substitution and minimisation of substances of concern (SoC) as well as the phase-out of
substances of very high concern (SVHCs) within its own operations and throughout its supply
chain.
The main goal of the EU policies regarding SVHCs is to ensure a high level of protection for human
health and the environment by phasing them out where possible.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 112 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
As explained in Annex II to Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2772, Substances of Very
High Concern (SVHCs) are those that meet the criteria laid down in Article 57 of Regulation (EC)
No 1907/2006 (REACH) and that were identified in accordance with Article 59 (1) of that
Regulation.
The European Chemical Agency (ECHA) website includes a public registry for intentions, which
lists the intentions and Annex XV restriction proposals received by the ECHA. Once an Annex XV
SVHC dossier has been prepared and the scientific evidence for identifying a substance as a SVHC
has been outlined, a consultation of the Member States and interested parties is required, as
specified in Article 59 of REACH. Further details on this consultation process are available on the
ECHA website at http://echa.europa.eu/proposals-to-identify-substances-of-very-high-concern.
At the end of the process laid down in Article 59 of REACH, the substance may be included in the
Candidate List – which is the list relevant for the identification of SVHCs (please see ID 301).
As the inclusion of substances in the Candidate List results in a number of immediate legal
obligations on listing substances on their own, in mixtures and in articles, it is an indication that
these substances are of concern to authorities and that they might be prioritised for further
regulation.
Answer
The requirement in ESRS E2 paragraph 15 (b) is to indicate whether and how the undertaking’s
policy aligns with the public policy objectives of phasing out SVHCs as outlined in REACH and in
line with the ambitions of the Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability.
To identify SVHCs, undertakings consult the Candidate List of Substances of Very High Concern
managed by the European Chemicals Agency pursuant to Article 59 (10) of Regulation (EC) No
1907/2006 (REACH). The Candidate List is provided by the ECHA on its official website and can be
directly consulted by undertakings for information purposes.
Please refer also to explanations ID 226 and ID 301 for further information on Substances of (Very
High) Concern.
ESRS E2-4 Pollution of air, water and soil
Question ID 201 – Oil spills – Chemical spills
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Are oil/chemical spills to be reported under DR E2-4 paragraph 28 or elsewhere?
ESRS reference
ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement E2-4 paragraph 28; ESRS E4 Disclosure requirements IRO-1
paragraph AR 9 (b)(i); ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement SBM-3 paragraph 14 (b); ESRS S2
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 113 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Disclosure Requirement SBM-3 paragraph 11 (c); ESRS S3 Disclosure Requirement SBM-3
paragraph 9 (b)
Key terms
Oil spill; chemical spill; pollution of air, water and soil; incident
Background
ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement IRO-1 requires undertakings to explain how they determined the
materiality of pollution-related impacts, risks and opportunities.
ESRS 1 paragraph 33 states: ‘When disclosing information on policies, actions and targets in
relation to a sustainability matter that has been assessed to be material, the undertaking shall
include the information prescribed by all the Disclosure Requirements and datapoints in the
topical and sector-specific ESRS related to that matter.’
ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement E2-4 paragraph 28 requires undertakings to disclose pollutants
emitted to air, water and soil.
ESRS E2 paragraph 41 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose any relevant contextual information
including a description of material incidents and deposits whereby pollution had negative impacts
on the environment and/or is expected to have negative effects on the undertaking’s financial
cash flows, financial position and financial performance with short-, medium- and long-term time
horizons.’
ESRS E2 paragraph 28 (a) further addresses disclosures on pollutants by referencing relevant
regulation: ‘disclose the amounts of ... each pollutant listed in Annex II of Regulation (EC) No
166/2006 ... emitted to air, water and soil.’ To this end, the European Pollutant Release and
Transfer Register (E-PRTR) Regulation mentions ‘spilling’ as a particular type of pollutant ‘release’
(Article 2 (10)). Article 5 (2) of E-PRTR Regulation specifies that operators have to ‘include
information on releases and transfers resulting as totals of all deliberate, accidental, routine and
non-routine activities.’
Spills are not, however, an issue addressed by ESRS E2 disclosure only. Under the section
‘Interaction with other ESRS’, ESRS E2 paragraph 7 and 8 make clear its interaction with other
environmental and social topics. As an example, ESRS E2 paragraph 7 (c) indicates ‘Pollution as a
direct impact driver of biodiversity loss’ (ESRS E4) when considering other environmental impacts,
and ESRS E4 (biodiversity and ecosystem) refers to ‘Spills of polluting effluents’ as an example of
policy transition risk (E4-IRO-1 paragraph AR9 (b)(i)).
Oil spills also have social implications, and ‘incidents’ and ‘spills’ are referred to in ESRS S1-SBM-
3 paragraph 14 (b), ESRS S2-SBM-3 paragraph 11 (c), and ESRS S3-SBM-3 paragraph 9 (b). These
paragraphs indicate the requirements to disclose on the social implications of spillages, in
addition to the environmental ones in E2, in alignment with the principle that ESRS mutually
interact with one another.
ESRS 2 paragraph 61 states: ‘The corresponding disclosures shall be located alongside disclosures
prescribed by the relevant ESRS. When a single policy or the same actions address several
interconnected sustainability matters, the undertaking may disclose the required information in
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 114 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
its reporting under one topical ESRS and cross reference to it in its reporting under other topical
ESRS.’
Answer
Where spills can result in material pollution-related impacts, undertakings shall provide
disclosure in accordance with the provisions of ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement related to ESRS 2
IRO-1 (materiality assessment) and ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement E2-1 (policies), E2-2 (actions)
and E2-3 (targets).
Concerning quantitative information on oil and chemical spills, undertakings shall also disclose
metrics by reporting on chemical releases to air, water and soil as prescribed by ESRS E2
Disclosure Requirement E2-4, referring to the E-PRTR (European Pollutant Release and Transfer
Register) Regulation, which mentions ‘spilling’ as a particular type of pollutant ‘release’ in Art. 2
(10). In this regard, undertakings are also to provide complementary contextual information on
incidents if these had negative environmental impacts and whenever they resulted in, or are
expected to have, (material) financial effects (ESRS Disclosure Requirement E2-6 paragraph 41).
If applicable, undertakings shall develop entity-specific metrics, too, in accordance with ESRS 1
paragraph 11 and ESRS 2 Metrics MDR-M.
Furthermore, spills can have material adverse impacts on water availability, ecosystems and
human health. Therefore, undertakings shall report those impacts in accordance with the relevant
disclosures under ESRS E3, ESRS E4, ESRS S1, ESRS S2, and ESRS S3 if material.
Reporting the impacts of spills under the several aforementioned ESRS topics may result in
undertakings needing to work with different metrics; for example: for pollution, amounts of
pollutants; for biodiversity, metrics that measure changes in the number of individuals of a
species; for own workforce, the number of fatalities or number of days lost to work-related
injuries or ill health; etc. Currently, there are no specific metrics concerning spills in the sector-
agnostic ESRS, nor are there requirements related to the spillage of complex substances that may
trigger pollution through different types of pollutants. The forthcoming sector standards may
develop sector-specific disclosures related to spills.
In terms of the presentation of disclosures, the undertaking can first provide specific information
within the scope of one topical standard (e.g., pollution), then cross-reference this information
to other interconnected topical standards (e.g., ESRS E4, S1) when addressing sustainability
matters that are interconnected (ESRS 2 paragraph 61).
Supporting material
Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 January 2006
concerning the establishment of a European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register.
Question ID 440 - Pollutants emissions – disaggregation
Release date
May 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 115 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Question asked
The amount of each pollutant to air, water and soil shall be consolidated over the facilities. Does
this mean one single/consolidated value for each pollutant into all categories? Or does this mean
one value for emissions into air, one value for emissions into water and one for emissions into
soil?
ESRS reference
ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement E2-4 paragraphs 28 (a), 29, and AR 22
Key terms
Pollutant disaggregation
Background
ESRS E2-4 paragraph 28 (a) states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the amounts of . . . each
pollutant listed in Annex II of Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 of the European Parliament and of
the Council (European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register “E-PRTR Regulation”) emitted to
air, water and soil, with the exception of emissions of GHGs which are disclosed in accordance
with ESRS E1 Climate Change’.
ESRS E2-4 paragraph 29 states: ‘The amounts referred in paragraph 28 shall be consolidated
amounts including the emissions from those facilities over which the undertaking has financial
control and those over which it has operational control. The consolidation shall include only the
emissions from facilities for which the applicable threshold value specified in Annex II of
Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 is exceeded’.
ESRS E2-4 paragraph AR 22 states: ‘The information required under this Disclosure Requirement
shall be provided at the level of the reporting undertaking. However, the undertaking may
disclose additional breakdown including information at site level or a breakdown of its emissions
by type of source, by sector or by geographical area’.
Regulation (EC) No 166/2006, Article 5 (1)(a) on ‘Reporting by operators’: ‘The operator of each
facility that undertakes one or more of the activities specified in Annex I above the applicable
capacity thresholds specified therein shall report the amounts annually to its competent
authority, along with an indication of whether the information is based on measurement,
calculation or estimation, of . . . releases to air, water and land of any pollutant specified in Annex
II for which the applicable threshold value specified in Annex II is exceeded’.
Answer
In line with the reporting requirements according to the E-PRTR Regulation, undertakings are to
disclose the emissions of each pollutant as separate annual amounts for each environmental
medium, i.e. released to air, released to water and released to soil. Consolidation refers to the
aggregation of pollutant emissions across the different facilities that the undertaking financially
or operationally controls (ESRS E2 paragraph 29). The consolidation shall include only the
emissions from facilities for which the applicable threshold value specified in Annex II of
Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 is exceeded.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 116 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
The following example illustrates an undertaking that operates two industrial facilities in which
the threshold values specified in Annex II of Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 are exceeded:
Pollutant Releases to air Releases to water Releases to soil/land*
(kg/a) (kg/a) (kg/a)
…
Nitrogen oxides xxx - -
(NOx/NO2)
(threshold value
100.000 kg/a)
…
Chlorides (as total Cl) - yyy zzz
(threshold value 2
million kg/a)
…
*Please note that ESRS E2 uses the terms “emissions” and “soil” whereas the E-PRTR-Regulation
uses the terms “releases” and “land”. The terms can be understood interchangeably as regards
the disclosures required by ESRS E2 paragraph 28 (a).
In the example, the nitrogen oxide and chlorides represent the consolidated amount from the two
facilities.
An undertaking may also disclose additional breakdowns of its emissions by type of source, by
sector or by geographical area (ESRS E2 paragraph AR22 and ESRS 1 chapter 3.7 Level of
disaggregation).
Supporting material
Regulation (EC) No 166/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 January 2006
concerning the establishment of a European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register.
Question ID 441 - Microplastics
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Is the undertaking required to report on microplastics within the facility (‘generated or used’)?
ESRS reference
ESRS Disclosure Requirement E2-4 paragraphs 28 (b), and AR 20
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 117 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Key terms
Microplastics
Background
ESRS E2-4 paragraph 28 (b) states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the amounts of . . . microplastics
generated or used by the undertaking’.
ESRS E2-4 paragraph AR 20 states: ‘The information to be provided on microplastics under
paragraph 28 (b) shall include microplastics that have been generated or used during production
processes or that are procured, and that leave the undertaking’s facilities as emissions, as
products, or as part of products or services. Microplastics may be unintentionally produced when
larger pieces of plastics like car tires or synthetic textiles wear and tear or may be deliberately
manufactured and added to products for specific purposes (e.g., exfoliating beads in facial or body
scrubs).’
Answer
If material, an undertaking is to provide, as a minimum, information on the microplastics amounts
that it generates or uses. These refer to intentional or unintentional generation or use, both
through production processes and procurement. For reporting purposes, microplastics leaving the
facilities of the undertaking in the form of products, parts of products or services, or emissions
are to be considered. Microplastics that stay within the facilities, that are used in production
processes and that represent inventory used for business processes need not be reported, as they
do not leave the facilities.
Legislation on the matter of microplastics is currently evolving; hence, more defined requirements
may be expected in the future.
ESRS E2-5 Substances of concern and substances of very high concern
Question ID 226 and 301– Substances of (very high) concern and
hazard classes
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
1. What is the difference between ‘substances of concern’ (SoCs) and ‘substances of very
high concern’ (SVHCs) in ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement E2-5?
2. What are the lists of substances of concern (SoC) and substances of very high concern
(SVHCs) to be considered?
3. What are their respective main hazard classes?
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 118 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement E2-5 paragraph 34; Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms:
‘Substances of Concern (SoC)’ and ‘Substances of Very High Concern (SVHCs)’
Key terms
Substances of concern; SoC; substances of very high concern; SVHC
Background
[ID 226 and 301 were both on Substances of (Very High) Concern. As they have related answers,
they were combined in the questions above. To better answer the questions addressed by the
submitters, it was agreed to change the questions received from ID 226 ‘What is the difference
between ‘substances of concern’ and ‘substances of very high concern’ in ESRS E2 Disclosure
Requirement E2-5?’ and ID 301 ‘What is the list of substances of high concern to be considered?
Is the list of substances of Very High Concern the one in Annex XIV of REACH? What are the main
hazard classes of substances of concern and very high concern that must be considered for
reporting under paragraph 34?’ to the questions above.]
As per the definition in ESRS Glossary in Annex II of the Commission Delegated Regulation (EU)
2023/2772, a substance of concern (SoC) is a ‘substance that meets at least one of three criteria:’
1) ‘meets the criteria laid down in Article 57 and is identified in accordance with Article 59
(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council
(REACH) – this group of substances corresponds to Substances of Very High Concern;
2) is classified in Part 3 (which lists hazardous substances for which harmonised
classification and labelling have been established at Community level) of Annex VI
(Harmonised classification and labelling for certain hazardous substances) to Regulation
(EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Regulation on
classification, labelling and packaging (CLP) of substances) in one of the following hazard
classes or hazard categories:
(a) carcinogenicity categories 1 and 2;
(b) germ cell mutagenicity categories 1 and 2;
(c) reproductive toxicity categories 1 and 2;
(d) endocrine disruption for human health;
(e) endocrine disruption for the environment;
(f) Persistent, Mobile and Toxic or Very Persistent, Very Mobile properties;
(g) Persistent, Bioaccumulative and Toxic or Very Persistent, Very Bioaccumulative
properties;
(h) respiratory sensitisation category 1;
(i) skin sensitisation category 1;
(j) chronic hazard to the aquatic environment categories 1 to 4;
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 119 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
(k) hazardous to the ozone layer;
(l) specific target organ toxicity, repeated exposure categories 1 and 2;
(m) specific target organ toxicity, single exposure categories 1 and 2;
3) or negatively affects the re-use and recycling of materials in the product in which it is
present, as defined in relevant Union product-specific ecodesign requirements.’
The ESRS Glossary defines substances of very high concern (SVHCs) as substances ‘that meet the
criteria laid down in Article 57 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 (REACH)’ and that are ‘identified
in accordance with Article 59 (1) of that Regulation’.
Following Article 57 of REACH, the substances described below may be identified as SVHC:
(a) under the Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 (CLP) as: (a) carcinogenic of category 1A and 1B;
(b) mutagenic category 1A and 1B; (c) toxic for reproduction category 1A and 1B;
(b) under Annex XIII of REACH as: d) persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic; e) very persistent
and very bioaccumulative;
(c) other substances for which there is scientific evidence of probable serious effects to
human health or the environment, which give rise to an equivalent level of concern to
those other substances listed above, and which are identified on a case-by-case basis,
such as those having endocrine disrupting properties.
The list that is relevant for the identification of SVHCs is the ‘Candidate List of substances of very
high concern for Authorisation’, which compiles the list of substances that are potential
candidates for inclusion in Annex XIV (Authorisation list).
Concerning SoCs, these will include the SVHCs in the lists above (criterion 1) as well as all
substances corresponding to criterion 2 – but for which, at this stage, a comprehensive list cannot
be presented. Nevertheless, substances regulated under CLP would have information that could
allow their assessment as being SoCs. Furthermore, ECHA provides a database to filter Annex VI
by specific hazard classes: the C&L Inventory. As to criterion 3, it is still not yet fully regulated and,
hence, there is currently no specific list of chemicals for these criteria. However, ESRS 1 paragraph
11 states that ‘… when an undertaking concludes that an impact, risk or opportunity is not covered
or not covered with sufficient granularity by an ESRS but is material due to its specific facts and
circumstances, it shall provide additional entity-specific disclosures to enable users to understand
the undertaking’s sustainability-related impacts, risks or opportunities.’ Additionally, existing
standard product specification from CEN/CENELEC, academic literature or other sources could
provide valuable guidance to assess the risks of use of certain substances in products that may
potentially fall within criterion 3; nonetheless, no list can be provided at this stage.
Answer
1. What is the difference between ‘substances of concern’ (SoCs) and ‘substances of very
high concern’ (SVHCs) in ESRS E2 Disclosure Requirement E2-5?
As per the ESRS Glossary in Annex II of the Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/2772,
Substances of Concern constitute a broader group of substances, including:
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 120 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
(a) the Substances of Very High Concern meeting the criteria laid down in Art. 57 and 59 of
the REACH regulation;
(b) the substances classified in one of the hazard classes or hazard categories, as per point
(ii) of the definition of SoC in the ESRS Glossary (see 'Background' information), and as
listed in Part 3 (Table 3.1) of Annex VI of CLP;
(c) and substances that negatively affect the reuse and recycling of materials in the products
in which they are present, as defined in the relevant EU product-specific ecodesign
requirements (forthcoming).
2. What are the lists of substances of concern (SoC) and substances of very high concern
(SVHC) to be considered?
The list of substances covered by point (a) is available by consulting the ‘Candidate List of
substances of very high concern for Authorisation’ managed by the European Chemicals Agency
(ECHA), pursuant to Article 59 (10) of the REACH Regulation.
The list of substances covered by point (b) is available by consulting the table of harmonised
entries in Annex VI to CLP, containing all updates3 to the harmonised classification and labelling
of hazardous substances, which are available in Table 3 of Annex VI to the CLP Regulation,
managed by the ECHA. The ECHA also provides a database (C&L Inventory) to filter Annex VI by
specific hazard classes.
As for point (c), currently there are no Union product-specific ecodesign requirements available;
hence, there are no published lists for these substances. Nonetheless, undertakings are to follow
ESRS 1 indications on entity-specific disclosures should they conclude that a related impact, risk
or opportunity is material although not explicitly covered by the ESRS.
3. What are their respective main hazard classes?
Undertakings may refer to the regulatory sources – the REACH and CLP regulations – to identify
information on the definitions and lists of substances as well as for further indications on hazard
classes. Please also see background information.
Please also refer to explanations ID 186 and ID 226 for further information on Substances of (Very
High) Concern.
Lastly, please also refer to ID 186 for further information on Substances of (Very High) Concern.
Supporting material
Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December
2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals
(REACH).
Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December
2008 on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures (CLP).
3 Please note that the most recent updates made to Table 3 of Annex VI to CLP are not necessarily
already included in the most recent consolidated version of CLP but can be found in the respective
Commission Delegated Regulations amending that Table.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 121 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS E3 Water and marine resources
ESRS E3 Water and marine resources
Currently no explanations for this ESRS.
ESRS E4 Biodiversity
ESRS E4 Biodiversity
ESRS E4-5 – Impact metrics related to biodiversity and ecosystems change
Question ID 802 – Reference lists of biodiversity-sensitive areas
Release date
July 2024
Question asked
ESRS say ‘biodiversity sensitive areas’ are Natura 2000 network of protected areas, UNESCO
World Heritage sites and KBAs, plus other protected areas, as referred to in Appendix D of Annex
II to Commission Delegated Reg (EU) 2021/2139. Would any one of the datasets be sufficient for
this metric, or does it have to be all?
ESRS reference
ESRS E4-5 paragraph 35
Key terms
Biodiversity-sensitive areas
Background
ESRS E4-5 paragraph 35 states: ‘If the undertaking identified sites located in or near biodiversity-
sensitive areas that it is negatively affecting (see paragraph 19 (a)), the undertaking shall disclose
the number and area (in hectares) of sites owned, leased or managed in or near these protected
areas or key biodiversity areas.’
ANNEX II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms defines biodiversity-sensitive areas as: ‘Natura 2000
network of protected areas, UNESCO World Heritage sites and Key Biodiversity Areas (‘KBAs’), as
well as other protected areas, as referred to in Appendix D of Annex II to Commission Delegated
Regulation (EU) 2021/2139(8).’
Appendix D of Annex II to Commission Delegated Reg (EU) 2021/2139 states: ‘… For
sites/operations located in or near biodiversity-sensitive areas (including the Natura 2000
network of protected areas, UNESCO World Heritage sites and Key Biodiversity Areas, as well as
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 122 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
other protected areas), an appropriate assessment (3), where applicable, has been conducted
and based on its conclusions the necessary mitigation measures (4) are implemented.’
The World Database on Protected Areas (WDPA) is the most comprehensive global database of
marine and terrestrial protected areas. It is a joint project between the UN Environment
Programme and the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), and it is managed by
the UN Environment Programme World Conservation Monitoring Centre (UNEP-WCMC) in
collaboration with governments, non-governmental organisations, academia and industry.
Answer
To identify a biodiversity-sensitive area that meets the criteria of ESRS E4 Disclosure Requirement
E4-5, it is sufficient that the area is listed in only one of the sources mentioned under the
definition of biodiversity-sensitive area in the ESRS Glossary of Terms (see background).
If the relevant site is not included under the Natura 2000 network of protected areas, UNESCO
World Heritage sites and/or Key Biodiversity Areas (‘KBAs’), the undertaking needs to assess if it
falls under ‘other protected areas’ as per the ESRS glossary definition. Other protected areas
could be, for instance, forest protected areas or areas lying within river basin districts designated
as requiring special protection by governmental authorities. This may require consulting national
legislation sources defining these other protected areas. In addition, the World Database on
Protected Areas (WDPA) can support preparers in the identification of protected areas.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 123 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS E5 Resource use and circular economy
ESRS E5 Resource use and circular economy
Currently no explanations for this ESRS.
Questions related to Social
ESRS S1 Own workforce
ESRS S1 Own workforce
ESRS S1-4 Taking action on material impacts and approaches to mitigating
material risks and pursuing material opportunities related to own
workforce, and effectiveness of those actions and approaches
Question ID 214 - Resources to manage material impacts
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
In paragraph 43 of ESRS S1 (‘the undertaking shall disclose what resources are allocated to the
management of its material impacts, with information that allows users to gain an understanding
of how the material impacts are managed’), it is unclear whether ‘material impacts’ is meant to
cover all material impacts or only ‘own workforce’ material impacts.
ESRS reference
ESRS S1-4 paragraph 43; ESRS S1 paragraph AR48; ESRS S1 paragraph 1.
Key Terms
Resources to manage material impacts
Background
[The original question received has been reworded to the above to be clearer. The original
question was: ‘When mentioning ‘material impacts’ in paragraph 43 of ESRS S1-4, it is unclear if
you mean ‘all’ material impacts or ‘own workforce’ material impacts.’]
ESRS S1 paragraph 1 clarifies the objective of ESRS S1, specifying that Disclosure Requirements in
this topical standard will ‘enable users of the sustainability statement to understand the
undertaking’s material impacts on its own workforce.’
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 124 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS S1-4 paragraph 43 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose what resources are allocated to the
management of its material impacts, with information that allows users to gain an understanding
of how the material impacts are managed.’
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 48 further explains: ‘When disclosing the resources allocated to the
management of material impacts, the undertaking may explain which internal functions are
involved in managing the impacts and what types of action they take to address negative, and
advance positive, impacts.’
Answer
‘Resources allocated to the management of material impacts’ refers only to the disclosure of
resources allocated to the management of material matters pertaining to the ‘own workforce’
topic.
As paragraph 43 of ESRS S1-4 is part of the topical standard on ‘own workforce’, ‘material impacts’
in that paragraph is intended to refer specifically to material impacts on own workforce.
ESRS S1-6 Characteristics of the undertaking’s employees
Question ID 31 - Breakdown of temporary, permanent, and non-
guaranteed hours employees
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Is this a three-way split or are non-guaranteed hours employees part of temporary/permanent
employees?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1 paragraphs 50 (b), AR 55, and AR56
Key Terms
Employees permanent; employees temporary; employees non-guaranteed hours
Background
ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (b) requires the disclosure of: ‘the total number by head count or full-time
equivalent (FTE) of:
(d) permanent employees, and breakdown by gender;
(e) temporary employees, and breakdown by gender; and
(f) non-guaranteed hours employees, and breakdown by gender.’
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 125 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Further information on how to present this information can be found in Table 3 and Table 4 in
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 55, while ESRS S1 paragraph AR 56 also provides a definition of non-
guaranteed hours employees as following: ‘Non-guaranteed hours employees are employed by
the undertaking without a guarantee of a minimum or fixed number of working hours. The
employee may need to make themselves available for work as required, but the undertaking is
not contractually obliged to offer the employee a minimum or fixed number of working hours per
day, week, or month. Casual employees, employees with zero-hour contracts, and on-call
employees are examples that fall under this category.’
Answer
ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (b) requires a three-way split of employees as the text distinguishes
between three datapoints, (i) permanent, (ii) temporary and (iii) non-guaranteed hours
employees, and it specifies that a breakdown by gender is required for the three datapoints. In
addition, ESRS S1 paragraph AR 55, Table 3 and Table 4 offer further guidance by providing the
template for presenting information on employees by contract type.
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 56 specifies that ‘the definitions of permanent, temporary, non-guaranteed
hours . . . employees differ between countries . . .’ and it also provides a definition of non-
guaranteed hours employees. While permanent and temporary employment relationships define
the duration of a contract, a non-guaranteed hours contract refers mainly to the expected working
time. The defining characteristic of non-guaranteed hours contracts is that they do not guarantee
a minimum or fixed number of working hours.
In some countries, non-guaranteed hours contracts may be further classified as either permanent
or temporary according to national legislation. Hence, in these countries the undertaking reports
those non-guaranteed hours employees under paragraph 50 (b)(iii) and also under paragraph 50
(b)(i) or (ii). The provision of contextual information in ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (e) requires
explaining how the information is reported; for example, the undertaking would describe if non-
guaranteed hours employees are also included within the permanent and temporary datapoints.
Question ID 32 – Methodology for presenting information on
employees
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
The question above has been reworded as follows to be clearer:
1. Are both FTE and head count figures to be reported?
2. Can FTE be used as a proxy for head counts if 99% of the workforce is full-time?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1 paragraphs 50 (a), (b) and (d); 52 (a) and (b); 55 (b)(i); AR 55; and 34
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 126 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Key terms
Methodology to compile data; FTE
Background
[The question received: ‘Is there a materiality approach for the people reporting in place (for
example, if 99% of the workforce are full-time employees, the difference between our existing
FTE reporting and head count is negligible)? Does an additional head count reporting have to be
set up or can we keep FTE reporting and provide background information to users?’ has been
reworded to the above to be clearer.]
ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-6 on the characteristics of the undertaking’s employees
requires information on the number of employees and the number of breakdowns. The objective
of S1-6 is for the undertaking to provide insight into its approach to employment, to provide
contextual information that facilitates an understanding of the information reported in other
disclosures and to serve as the basis for calculating quantitative metrics to be disclosed under
other disclosure requirements in this Standard.
ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (a) requires the disclosure of ‘the total number of employees by head count,
and breakdowns by gender and by country for countries in which the undertaking has 50 or more
employees representing at least 10% of its total number of employees’. This requirement on the
number of employees is consistent with ESRS 2 SBM-1 paragraph 40 (a)(iii) whereby head count
data is also required.
ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-6 (paragraph 50 (b)) allows the undertaking to choose
between two methodologies to calculate the number of employees, which are either by head
count or full-time equivalent (FTE) of:
‘(i) permanent employees and breakdown by gender;
(ii) temporary employees and breakdown by gender; and
(iii) non-guaranteed hours employees and breakdown by gender.’
The voluntary disclosures in ESRS S1 paragraph 52 (a) (b) follow the same approach as detailed
above whereby there is the option of disclosing information on full-time and part-time employees
by either head count or FTE.
ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (d) requires ‘a description of the methodologies and assumptions used to
compile the data, including whether the numbers are reported:
(i) in head count or full-time equivalent (FTE) (including an explanation of how FTE is
defined) …’.
Furthermore, ESRS S1 paragraph AR 55, Table 3 and Table 4 provide the relevant tables to present
this information in (Table 3: ‘Template for presenting information on employees by contract type,
broken down by gender (head count or FTE)’; and Table 4: ‘Template for presenting information
on employees by contract type, broken down by region (head count or FTE)’).
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 127 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 60 states: ‘Where data is not available for detailed information, the
undertaking shall use an estimation of the employee number or ratios, in accordance with ESRS
1, and clearly identify where the use of estimates has taken place.’
Answer
1. Are both FTE and head count figures to be reported?
The datapoint on the total number of employees (ESRS 1 paragraph 50 (a)) shall be reported in
terms of head count, since head count is the relevant metric for labour law and social policy (as
head count triggers many rights in social and labour law), and this is also consistent with the
requirements in ESRS 2 SBM-1 paragraph 40 (a)(iii).
Recognizing that it is common in some countries to report detailed employee information in full-
time equivalent (FTE) terms, S1-6 allows undertakings the option to report other datapoints
(permanent, temporary and non-guaranteed hours contract types as well as full- and part-time
contract types) in either head count or full-time equivalent (FTE) terms.
According to ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (b) and paragraph 52 (a)(b), the undertaking has two options
to report information on employees by contract type: head count or full-time equivalent. (ESRS
S1 paragraph AR 55, tables 3 and 4 contain the templates that undertakings shall use to disclose
this information.)
The option to report employee numbers with either head count or FTE metrics is explicitly allowed
only in S1-6 and in S1-7 when reporting on non-employees within own workforce. For the other
metrics in ESRS S1 (i.e., from ESRS S1-8 to ESRS S1-17), the disclosure requirements and their
related application requirements define the methodology to be followed for calculating
quantitative information on employees (for example, ESRS S1-14 AR80 on health and safety).
2. Can FTE be used as a proxy for head counts if 99% of the workforce is full-time?
For ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (a), there is no option with respect to the unit of account. The
undertaking is expected to comply with the text of ESRS by providing a figure according to the
unit of account as defined in the Disclosure Requirement. Still, an undertaking may refer to ESRS
S1 paragraph AR60 on the use of estimates and ratios.
Question ID 365 - Significant employment
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Please confirm that ESRS S1-6 paragraph 50 (a) should be read as disclosing on countries with at
least 10% of employees, not EITHER 50 OR 10%: ‘the total number of employees by head count,
and breakdowns by gender and by country for countries in which the undertaking has 50 or more
employees representing at least 10% of its total number of employees.’
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 128 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (a), and AR54
Key terms
Significant employment
Background
ESRS S1-6 paragraph 50 (a) requires the disclosure of the following information: ‘the total number
of employees by head count, and breakdowns by gender and by country for countries in which
the undertaking has 50 or more employees representing at least 10% of its total number of
employees.’ ESRS S1 paragraph AR54 explains that the ‘number of employees in each country is
also a key trigger for many information, consultation and participation rights for workers and
workers’ representatives, both in the Union labour acquis and in national law.’ This concept of
significant employment is furthermore clarified in Disclosure Requirement S1-8. ESRS S1
paragraph 60 (b) defines significant employment as ‘at least 50 employees by head count
representing at least 10% of its total number of employees.’
Answer
The breakdown by country must be disclosed for countries where at least 10% of the
undertaking’s employees are employed and the number of employees is at least 50, i.e. both
threshold conditions need to be met.
ESRS 1 paragraph 50 (a) requires different types of employee information:
(a) the total number of employees by head count; and
(b) breakdowns by gender and by country for countries in which the undertaking has 50 or
more employees representing at least 10% of its total number of employees.
As illustrated by Table 1 in ESRS S1 paragraph AR 55, the gender breakdown applies to all
employees, i.e., the minimum employment threshold at the country level for reporting does not
apply to this. As illustrated in Table 2 in ESRS S1 paragraph AR 55, the number of employees at the
country level is to be reported; however, this reporting is mandatory only for countries in which
both threshold conditions apply.
ESRS S1-7 Characteristics of non-employee workers in the undertakings’
own workforce
Question ID 33 - Definition of non-employees
Release date
February 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 129 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Question asked
Which groups can be considered as employees or non-employee workers in line with the German
HGB respectively other national laws?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1 paragraphs 50 (a), 55 (a), 4, and AR 3
Key terms
Non-employees; employees
Background
ESRS S1 paragraph 4 describes the scope of ESRS S1 and states: ‘this Standard covers an
undertaking’s own workforce, which is understood to include both people who are in an
employment relationship with the undertaking (“employees”) and non-employees who are either
people with contracts with the undertaking to supply labour (“self-employed people”) or people
provided by undertakings primarily engaged in “employment activities” (NACE Code N78). See
Application Requirement 3 for examples of who falls under own workforce. The information
required to be disclosed with regard to non-employees shall not affect their status pursuant to
applicable labour law.’
In addition, ESRS S1 paragraph AR3 gives a number of examples of people who fall within the
category of non-employees and are included within ‘own workforce’; these are (a) contractors
(self-employed persons) and ‘(b) people employed by a third party engaged in “employment
activities” which include people who perform the same work that employees carry out.’
Answer
Since there is no definition of ‘employee’ provided under EU law, the status as an employee is
determined at the national level according to national laws and practice (employees are
individuals who are ‘in an employment relationship with the undertaking according to national
law and practice’).
The national labour law or practice of each country defines what type of contracts constitute an
employment relationship (i.e., an employee) and those that relate to non-employees.
ESRS S1-8 Collective bargaining coverage and social dialogue
Question ID 215 - Social dialogue global percentage
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Can you clarify the ‘global percentage reported at the country level’ in ESRS S1 paragraph 63?
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 130 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS reference
ESRS S1 paragraphs 63; AR 69; and AR 70
Key Terms
Social dialogue; employees - global percentage; significant employment
Background
ESRS S1 paragraph 63 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the following information in relation
to social dialogue: (a) the global percentage of employees covered by workers’ representatives,
reported at the country level for each EEA country in which the undertaking has significant
employment . . .’
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 69 specifies that, ‘for calculating the information required by paragraph 63
(a), the undertaking shall identify in which EEA countries it has significant employment (i.e., at
least 50 employees representing at least 10% of its total employees). For these countries it shall
report the percentage of employees in that country which are employed in establishments in
which employees are represented by workers’ representatives.’
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 70 provides a template for reporting on collective bargaining coverage and
social dialogue, specifying that it applies to ‘EEA countries only.’
Answer
The term ‘global’ refers to the total or overall percentage of employees in a specific EEA country
working in establishments (e.g., factories, branches) with workplace representation, based on the
International Labour Organisation’s (ILO) definition of workers’ representatives. Workplace
representation enables social dialogue at the establishment level, which is different from social
dialogue at the group, sectoral, national or EU level. As an undertaking may have several
establishments in one country, the aim of this metric is to obtain the overall percentage of
employees with workplace representation for each EEA country where the undertaking has
significant employment (i.e., at least 50 employees representing at least 10% of its total
employees).
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 70 provides a template to present this information in. The column under
the heading ‘Social dialogue’ provides an example of how an undertaking with significant
employment in two EEA countries (country A and country B) can report this data point.
Question ID 376 - Definition of collective bargaining
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Please provide a definition of collective bargaining agreement.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 131 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS reference
Disclosure Requirement S1-8
Key terms
Collective bargaining agreement; working conditions
Background
Annex II of the Delegated Regulation defines collective bargaining as follows: ‘All negotiations
which take place between an employer, a group of employers or one or more employers’
organisations, on the one hand, and one or more trade unions or, in their absence, the
representatives of the workers duly elected and authorised by them in accordance with national
laws and regulations, on the other, for: i. determining working conditions and terms of
employment; and/or ii. regulating relations between employers and workers; and/or regulating
relations between employers or their organisations and a worker’s organisation or workers’
organisations.’
Answer
Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms provides a definition of collective bargaining (see above)
based on ILO Convention 154 on Collective Bargaining:
Collective bargaining agreements are understood as written agreements resulting from collective
bargaining, as defined above (in line with ILO Collective Agreements Recommendation No. 91).
ESRS S1-14 Health and safety metrics
Question ID 352 - Work-related ill health and fatalities from ill health
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
With regard to the undertaking’s employees, the number of days lost to work-related injuries and
fatalities from work-related accidents, work-related ill health and fatalities from ill health’: Why is
‘work-related’ not mentioned in the last part of the data point (fatalities from ill health) but is
attached to every other breakdown of this data point?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1 paragraphs 86, and 88 (e)
Key terms
Days lost; work-related; fatalities
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 132 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Background
ESRS S1 paragraph 86 condenses the idea that: ‘The undertaking shall disclose information on . .
. the number of incidents associated with work-related injuries, ill health and fatalities of its own
workforce.’
ESRS S1 paragraph 88 states: ‘The disclosure required by paragraph 86 shall include the following
information, where applicable broken down between employees and non-employees in the
undertaking’s own workforce: … (e) with regard to the undertaking’s employees, the number of
days lost to work-related injuries and fatalities from work-related accidents, work-related ill health
and fatalities from ill health.’
The definition for recordable work-related injury or ill health as provided in Annex II of the
Delegated Regulation also does not repeatedly refer to ‘work-related’ ill health: ‘work-related
injury or ill health that results in any of the following: i. death, days away from work, restricted
work or transfer to another job, medical treatment beyond first aid, or loss of consciousness; or
ii. significant injury or ill health diagnosed by a physician or other licensed healthcare professional,
even if it does not result in death, days away from work, restricted work or job transfer, medical
treatment beyond first aid, or loss of consciousness.’
Answer
The objective of this Disclosure Requirement defines the information to be disclosed under ESRS
S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-14 and it describes fatalities to be disclosed that are the result of
work-related injuries and work-related ill health. Hence, ESRS S1 paragraph 88 (e) refers to work-
related ill health.
ESRS S1-15 Work-life balance
Question ID 340 – Entitlement to family-related leave
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Does the metric ‘family-related leave’ presume that an employee is entitled to every concept of
family-related leave?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1-15 paragraphs 93, AR96, and AR97
Key terms
Work-life balance; entitlement to take family-related leave
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 133 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Background
Family-related leave is addressed in ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-15; specifically, ESRS S1
paragraph 93 requires a disclosure of ‘(a) the percentage of employees entitled to take family-
related leave ...’
The relevant definitions can be found in ESRS S1 paragraph AR96, explaining that ‘family-related
leave includes maternity leave, paternity leave, parental leave and carer’s leave that is available
under national law or collective agreements. For the purposes of this Standard, these concepts
are defined as:
(a) maternity leave (also called pregnancy leave): employment-protected leave of absence for
employed women directly around the time of childbirth (or, in some countries, adoption);
(b) paternity leave: leave from work for fathers or, where and insofar as recognised by national
law, for equivalent second parents, on the occasion of the birth or adoption of a child for the
purposes of providing care;
(c) parental leave: leave from work for parents on the grounds of the birth or adoption of a child
to take care of that child, as defined by each Member State;
(d) carer’s leave from work: leave for workers to provide personal care or support to a relative,
or a person who lives in the same household, in need of significant care or support for a
serious medical reason, as defined by each Member State.’
Furthermore, ESRS S1 paragraph AR97 clarifies: ‘... employees entitled to family-related leave are
those who are covered by regulations, organisational policies, agreements, contracts or collective
bargaining agreements that contain family-related leave entitlements and have reported their
entitlement to the undertaking or the undertaking is aware of the entitlement.’
Answer
Yes, family-related leave is defined as including maternity leave, paternity leave, parental leave
and carer’s leave (ESRS S1 paragraph AR 96). The focus of the Disclosure Requirement is family-
related leave covered by regulations (for example, government’s social protection), organisational
policies, agreements, contracts or collective agreements (ESRS S1 paragraph AR97) that contain
family-related leave entitlements. Such entitlements may differ at a country level.
Being entitled to take family-related leave would thus mean, based on national law or collective
agreements, for female employees to be entitled to take maternity, parental and carer’s leave and
for male employees to be entitled to paternity, parental and carer’s leave. The scope of family
leave may vary across countries, and such contextual information may be relevant to users (for
example, that employees are entitled to maternity leave but not to paternity leave in a given
country). If based on national law or collective agreements female/male employees are not
entitled to all the respective female/male types of family-related leave, then they would not
qualify to be considered in the nominator of the metric.
Question ID 341 - Conditions for paternity, maternity, parental leave
Release date
May 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 134 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Question asked
What conditions must be met to consider an employee as being entitled to maternity or paternity
or parental leave in the meaning of ESRS S1?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1-15 paragraphs 92, 93, and AR 97
Key terms
Work-life balance; family-related leave
Background
The objective of Disclosure Requirement S1-15 is two-fold. Firstly, it aims to: ‘provide an
understanding of the entitlement and actual practices amongst the employees to take family-
related leave.’ (ESRS S1 paragraph 92). ESRS S1 paragraph 93 (a) requires a disclosure of ‘(a) the
percentage of employees entitled to take family-related leave.’ ESRS S1 paragraph 94 adds: ‘If all
of the undertaking’s employees are entitled to family-related leave through social policy and/or
collective bargaining agreements, it is sufficient to disclose this in order to meet the requirements
of paragraph 93 (a).’
ESRS S1 paragraph AR 97 explains where the entitlement to family-related leave may derive from:
‘. . . employees entitled to family-related leave are those who are covered by regulations,
organisational policies, agreements, contracts or collective bargaining agreements that contain
family-related leave entitlements and have reported their entitlement to the undertaking or the
undertaking is aware of the entitlement.’
The relevant definitions, in line with EU legislation on work-life balance, can be found in ESRS S1
paragraph AR 96, explaining: ‘Family-related leave include maternity leave, paternity leave,
parental leave, and carers’ leave that is available under national law or collective agreements. For
the purposes of this Standard, these concepts are defined as:
(a) Maternity Leave (also called pregnancy leave): ‘employment-protected leave of absence
for employed women directly around the time of childbirth (or, in some countries,
adoption);
(b) Paternity Leave: leave from work for fathers or, where and in so far as recognised by
national law, for equivalent second parents, on the occasion of the birth or adoption of a
child for the purposes of providing care;
(c) Parental Leave: leave from work for parents on the grounds of the birth or adoption of a
child to take care of that child, as defined by each Member State;
(d) Carers’ Leave from work: leave for workers to provide personal care or support to a
relative, or a person who lives in the same household, in need of significant care or
support for a serious medical reason, as defined by each Member State.’
Answer
The entitlement to family-related leave does not depend on any triggering conditions (i.e., as
otherwise only pregnant employees would be entitled). Whether an employee is entitled to
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 135 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
family-related leave depends on family-related leave provisions under national law or collective
agreements (ESRS S1 paragraph AR96) where specific thresholds of minimum employment time
periods may exist to become entitled.
Employees entitled to family-related leave are those who are covered by regulations,
organisational policies, agreements, contracts or collective bargaining agreements that contain
family-related leave entitlements. The scope of family leave entitlement may vary across
countries, and such contextual information may be relevant to disclose to users.
ESRS S1-16 Remuneration metrics (pay gap and total remuneration)
Question ID 132 - Gender pay gap
Release date
March 2024
Question asked
Can you please specify if for the below indicators: the gender pay gap, defined as the difference
of average pay levels between female and male employees, expressed as percentage of the
average pay level of male employees; should we include variable components of salary or only
gross wage?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1-16 paragraphs 95, 97, and 98
Key Terms
Gender pay gap; gross wage; salary - variable components
Background
Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms states the following:
‘PAY: the ordinary basic or minimum wage or salary and any other remuneration, whether in cash
or in kind, which the worker receives directly or indirectly (“complementary or variable
components”) in respect of his/her employment from his/her employer. “Pay level” means gross
annual pay and the corresponding gross hourly pay. “Median pay level” means the pay of the
employee that would have half of the employees earn more and half less than they do’.
Disclosure Requirement S1-16 includes the following paragraphs on remuneration metrics (pay
gap and total remuneration):
‘95. The undertaking shall disclose the percentage gap in pay between its female and male
employees and the ratio between the remuneration of its highest paid individual and the median
remuneration for its employees.’
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 136 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
‘97. The disclosure required by paragraph 95 shall include: (a) the gender pay gap, defined as the
difference of average pay levels between female and male employees, expressed as a percentage
of the average pay level of male employees . . .’
‘98. The undertaking may disclose a breakdown of the gender pay gap as defined in paragraph
97 (a) by employee category and/or by country/segment. The undertaking may also disclose the
gender pay gap between employees by categories of employees broken down by ordinary basic
salary and complementary or variable components’.
ESRS S1 paragraph 97 includes additional information in a footnote as follows: ‘The gender pay
gap information supports the information needs of: financial market participants subject to
Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 because it is derived from a mandatory indicator related to principal
adverse impacts as set out by indicator #12 in Table I of Annex I of Commission Delegated
Regulation (EU) 2022/1288 with regard to disclosure rules on sustainable investments
(“Unadjusted gender pay gap”); and benchmark administrators to disclose ESG factors subject to
Regulation (EU) 2020/1816 as set out by indicator “Weighted average gender pay gap” in Section
1 and 2 of Annex II.’
Answer
Complementary and variable components of the employee’s remuneration package form part of
the calculation. Annex II Acronyms and Glossary of Terms defines ‘pay’ as the salary and other
remuneration in cash or in kind that the employee directly or indirectly receives in respect of
his/her employment.
ESRS S1-16 AR 98 describes the methodology to follow when calculating the gender pay gap
required by ESRS S1-16 paragraph 97 (a). The value to be used in the ratio is the gross hourly pay
level.
Question ID 387 - Scope of ESRS S1-16
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
ESRS S1-16 talks about employees but does not specify if it is only those that meet the inclusion
criteria (at least 50 employees and 10% of total employment).
ESRS reference
ESRS S1-6 paragraph 50 (a); Disclosure Requirement S1-16
Key terms
Employees; gender pay gap; significant employees
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 137 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Background
ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-16 paragraph 95 states: ‘The undertaking shall disclose the
percentage gap in pay between its female and male employees and the ratio between the
remuneration of its highest paid individual and the median remuneration for its employees.’
The key characteristics of the undertaking’s employees are to be reported on in ESRS S1 Disclosure
Requirement S1-6, which serves as a basis for information required by other disclosure
requirements. ESRS S1 paragraph 50 (a) requires the disclosure of ‘the total number of employees
by head count’ as well as ‘breakdowns by gender and by country for countries in which the
undertaking has 50 or more employees representing at least 10% of its total number of
employees;’.
Answer
ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1-16 and AR 98-102 specifically refer to including all employees
by head count in the calculation. Undertakings may report additional information based on
differentiating the pay gap by specific employee groups or country/segment, as specified in
paragraph 98; however, there is no employment threshold specified for the voluntary reporting
of this additional information.
ESRS S2 Policies related to value chain workers
ESRS S2 Policies related to value chain workers
Question ID 356 – Sub-contractors Scope S1, S2
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Are subcontractors included in own workforce, or are they to be included within the S2-
disclosures?
ESRS reference
ESRS S1 paragraph 4; ESRS S1 paragraph 5
Key terms
Own workforce; workers in the value chain
Background
[The question received, ‘Are sub-consultants included in own workforce, or are they to be
included within the ESRS S2-disclosures?’ has been reworded into the above question to be
clearer.]
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 138 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS S1 paragraph 4 states: ‘This Standard covers an undertaking’s own workforce, which is
understood to include both people who are in an employment relationship with the undertaking
(“employees”) and non-employees who are either people with contracts with the undertaking to
supply labour (“self-employed people”) or people provided by undertakings primarily engaged in
“employment activities” (NACE Code N78). See Application Requirement 3 for examples of who
falls under own workforce. The information required to be disclosed with regard to non-
employees shall not affect their status pursuant to applicable labour law.’
ESRS S1 paragraph 5 states: ‘This Standard does not cover workers in the undertaking’s upstream
or downstream value chain; these categories of workers are covered in ESRS S2 Workers in the
value chain.’
Answer
The definition of ‘non-employees’ only includes individual contractors supplying labour to the
undertaking (self-employed people) and people provided by undertakings primarily engaged in
employment activities (NACE Code N78). If they are not included in this definition, they shall be
considered workers in the value chain (ESRS S2).
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 139 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS S3 Affected communities
ESRS S3 Affected communities
Currently no explanations for this ESRS.
ESRS S4 Consumers and end-users
ESRS S4 Consumers and end-users
Currently no explanations for this ESRS.
Questions related to Governance
ESRS G1 Business conduct
ESRS G1 Business conduct
Question ID 479 – Minimum disclosure requirements and ESRS G1
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Do MDRs have to be applied for matters that are to be reported following the ESRS G1?
ESRS reference
ESRS G1; ESRS 2 Section 4.2 paragraphs 63 to 81
Key terms
Minimum disclosure requirements
Background
ESRS 2 Section 4.2, paragraph 60 states that Minimum Disclosure Requirements (MDR) should ‘. .
. be included when the undertaking discloses information on its policies and actions to prevent,
mitigate and remediate actual and potential material impacts, to address material risks and/or to
pursue material opportunities (collectively, to “manage material sustainability matters”). They
shall be applied together with the Disclosure Requirements, including Application Requirements,
provided in the relevant topical and sector-specific ESRS.’
ESRS 2 Section 4.2, paragraph 70 establishes that Minimum Disclosure Requirements ‘shall be
included when the undertaking discloses information on its metrics and targets related to each
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 140 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
material sustainability matter. They shall be applied together with the Disclosure Requirements,
including Application Requirements, provided in the relevant topical ESRS.’
All the MDRs that shall be read in conjunction with the relevant topical ESRS, including those
affecting Policies, Actions, Targets and Metrics, are established in paragraphs 63 to 81 of ESRS 2.
Answer
The MDRs from paragraphs 63 to 81 in ESRS 2 shall be applied with respect to Policies, Actions,
Targets and Metrics in G1 irrespective of the fact that there is no cross-reference in the topical
standard.
ESRS G1-4 Incidents of corruption or bribery
Question ID 417 - Convictions
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
What is the definition to be used for ‘convictions’? It could be different things: Number of
convictions of proceeding that are still open? Or started in the reporting year? Closed in the
reporting year? Appeal concluded? Not subject to appeal anymore?
ESRS reference
ESRS G1-4 paragraph 24 (a)
Key terms
Convictions
Background
ESRS G1 paragraph 24 states that: ‘The undertaking shall disclose:
(a) the number of convictions and the amount of fines for violation of anti-corruption and
anti- bribery laws; and
(b) any actions taken to address breaches in procedures and standards of anti-corruption
and anti-bribery.’
Based on EU Law and on the European Criminal Records Information System (ECRIS), the term
‘conviction’ is defined as ‘any final decision of a criminal court against a natural person in respect
of a criminal offence, to the extent that the decision is entered in the criminal records of the
convicting Member State’.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 141 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Answer
ESRS G1 uses the definition of ‘convictions’ derived from European Law. Based on EU Law and on
the European Criminal Records Information System (ECRIS), the term conviction is defined as ‘any
final decision of a criminal court against a natural person in respect of a criminal offence, to the
extent that the decision is entered in the criminal records of the convicting Member State’.
Therefore, the disclosure requirement applies to the number of convictions that fulfil the
definition of a final decision of a criminal court. This is understood in the general sense of the
term, i.e., that of the court of the first instance. This approach has the advantage of including all
the convictions in the reporting while awaiting the outcome of a possible appeal. The reporting
undertaking may provide additional information if an appeal is considered, has been lodged or
was successful as this would be relevant information to users.
ESRS G1-5 Political influence and lobbying activities
Question ID 510 – ESRS G1-5 Indirect political contributions and
lobbying activities
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
In ESRS G1-5, what is the dividing line between ‘indirect political contributions’, whose financial
or in-kind amounts must be disclosed according to paragraph 29 (b)(i) and AR 10, and ‘lobbying
activities’, whose financial or in-kind amounts may be disclosed as per AR 12?
ESRS reference
ESRS G1-5 paragraphs 29 (b), AR 10, and AR 12
Key terms
Political contributions, lobbying activities
Background
The concept of ‘political contributions’ is defined in AR 9 of ESRS G1-Business Conduct. This
paragraph states that political contributions refer to support provided directly to political parties,
their elected representatives or persons seeking political office.
The concept ‘indirect political contributions’ is defined in AR 10 of ESRS G1-Business Conduct. This
paragraph states that these refer to ‘those political contributions made through an intermediary
organisation such as a lobbyist or charity, or support given to an organisation such as a think tank
or trade association linked to or supporting particular political parties or causes.’
GRI, in its standard 415: Public Policy defines ‘indirect political contributions’ as ‘financial or in-
kind support to political parties, their representatives, or candidates for office made through an
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 142 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
intermediary organization such as a lobbyist or charity, or support given to an organization such
as a think tank or trade association linked to or supporting particular political parties or causes.’
The ESRS and GRI refer to ‘indirect political contributions’ as contributions linked to political
parties and political causes.
On the other hand, ‘lobbying activities’ as defined in Annex II of ESRS refer to ‘activities carried
out with the objective of influencing the formulation or implementation of policy or legislation,
or the decision-making processes of governments, governmental institutions, regulators,
European Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies or standard setters.’
Answer
Political contributions support political parties and/or election campaigns in their respective
political causes, and they can be direct or indirect. Indirect political contributions are made on
behalf of a company by an intermediary organisation, such as a think tank, a business association
or a charity. While political contributions are most commonly financial, e.g., donations, event
sponsorships or purchases of tickets at campaign or fundraising events, they can also be non-
financial (‘in kind’), e.g., providing certain services like printing of posters, website design or
permission to use facilities.
Lobbying, on the other hand, is about influencing policies, political decisions, laws and other
regulations, usually when they are being drafted or prepared but also in the implementation
stage. The typical targets of lobbying activities are therefore decision-makers in governments and
ministries, supervisory authorities and other government agencies as well as members of
parliaments and/or their assistants. Lobbying, too, can take direct or indirect forms. In the latter
case, the company entrusts the lobbying to a specialised service provider or to a not-for-profit
intermediary such as a business association.
Question ID 560 – Beneficiary of political contributions
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Undertakings are required, for financial or in-kind political contributions, to report the total
monetary value of financial and in-kind political contributions made directly and indirectly by the
undertaking, aggregated by country or geographical area where relevant, as well as the type of
recipient/beneficiary. Does that include a requirement to disclose the exact name of the
beneficiary or simply its type?
ESRS reference
ESRS G1-5 paragraph 29 (b)
Key terms
Political contributions, beneficiary
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 143 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Background
ESRS G1-5 paragraph 29 states the following: ‘The disclosure required by paragraph 27 shall
include … (b) for financial or in-kind political contributions: (i) the total monetary value of financial
and in-kind political contributions made directly and indirectly by the undertaking, aggregated by
country or geographical area where relevant, as well as type of recipient/beneficiary ...’
Answer
The Disclosure Requirement refers to the type of recipient/beneficiary and does not extend to
the name of the beneficiary.
ESRS G1-6 Payment practices
Question ID 419 – Legal proceedings currently outstanding for late
payments
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Regarding the number of currently outstanding legal proceedings for late payments, are you
referring to ‘currently outstanding’ that remained opened in the reporting year or also closed in
the reporting year?
ESRS reference
ESRS G1 paragraph 33 (c)
Key terms
Late payments; legal proceedings
Background
ESRS G1 paragraph 33 (c) refers to the ‘number of legal proceedings currently outstanding for late
payments’ when stating what the disclosure under paragraph 31 shall include, under G1-6
Payment Practices.
Answer
The Disclosure Requirement refers specifically to those legal proceedings that have not been
legally resolved at year-end. Further information or additional remarks regarding closed legal
proceedings related to late payments during the year may be disclosed under ESRS G1 paragraph
33 (d), which states that the undertaking shall disclose ‘complementary information necessary to
provide sufficient context’.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 144 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Question ID 444 - Payment practices
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Regarding the DR on payment practices in G1-6, is the information on payment practices only
expected regarding SMEs or a wider range of suppliers?
ESRS reference
ESRS G1-6
Key terms
Payment practices; late payments
Background
ESRS G1 paragraph 2 presents the list of matters covered in the standard, which are collectively
referred to as ‘business conduct or business conduct matters’. Paragraph 2 (b) clarifies that ‘the
management of relationships with suppliers, including payment practices, especially with regard
to late payments to small and medium-sized undertakings’.
Disclosure Requirement G1-6 paragraph 31 states that ‘the undertaking shall provide information
on its payment practices’.
ESRS G1 paragraph 32 states that ‘The objective of this Disclosure Requirement (G1-6) is to
provide insights on the contractual payment terms and on its performance with regard to
payment, especially as to how these impact SMEs and specifically with respect to late payments
to SMEs.’
Answer
The information on payment practices is not limited to SMEs but regarding all suppliers.
However, the list of ‘shall’ data points in ESRS G1 paragraph 33 has to be read in the context of
the disclosure objective, which refers ‘especially’ to SMEs. Undertakings are expected, as part of
ESRS G1 paragraph 33 (d), to provide complementary information, if material, to provide sufficient
context, including information on payment practices specific to SMEs; for example, because there
are significant differences in payment practices vis-a-vis large and SME business partners.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 145 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Questions related to XBRL and datapoints
Question ID 326 – Implementation of datapoints
Release date
May 2024
Question asked
Why are some ESRS paragraphs and Application Requirements (AR) implemented as separate
datapoints in IG 3 List of ESRS Datapoints and some are not?
ESRS reference
IG 3 List of ESRS Data Points
Key terms
List of datapoints
Background
ESRS 1 paragraph 16 states: ‘ESRS structure the information to be disclosed under Disclosure
Requirements. Each Disclosure Requirement consists of one or more distinct datapoints. The term
“datapoint” can also refer to a narrative sub-element of a Disclosure Requirement.’
ESRS 1 paragraph 18 states: ‘ESRS use the following terms to distinguish between different
degrees of obligation on the undertaking to disclose information:
(a) “shall disclose” – indicates that the provision is prescribed by a Disclosure Requirement
or datapoint;
(b) “may disclose” – indicates voluntary disclosure to encourage good practice.
In addition, ESRS use the term “shall consider” when referring to issues resources or
methodologies that the undertaking is expected to take into account or to use in the preparation
of a given disclosure if applicable.’
IG 3 List of ESRS Data Points – Explanatory note and the ESRS XBRL Taxonomy provide non-
authoritative implementation guidance on the datapoints required by ESRS. It supports the
application of sector-agnostic ESRS adopted as delegated act on 31 July 2023 (see EFRAG IG 3 List
of ESRS data points – Explanatory note chapter Content and objective of this Implementation
Guidance).
ESRS E1 paragraph 36 states: ‘The objective of this Disclosure Requirement is to provide an
understanding of the undertaking’s total energy consumption in absolute value, improvement in
energy efficiency, exposure to coal, oil and gas-related activities, and the share of renewable
energy in its overall energy mix.’
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 146 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ESRS E1 paragraph AR36 states: ‘When preparing the information on energy intensity required
under paragraph 40, the undertaking shall:
(a) calculate the energy intensity ratio using the following formula: …‘
ESRS E1 paragraph AR38 states: ‘The reconciliation of net revenue from activities in high climate
impact sectors to the relevant financial statements line item or disclosure (as required by
paragraph 43) may be presented either:
(a) by a cross-reference to the related line item or disclosure in the financial statements;
or
(b) if the net revenue cannot be directly cross-referenced to a line item or disclosure in
the financial statements, by a quantitative reconciliation using the below tabular
format. …‘
Answer
IG 3 List of Data Points – Explanatory note (as well as the ESRS XBRL Taxonomy) have dedicated
and separate items only for the individual datapoints of ESRS Disclosure Requirements. The
datapoints are often indicated by terms equal or similar to ‘shall disclose’, ‘shall describe’ or ‘may
disclose’. All paragraphs of ESRS 1, and some paragraphs and Application Requirements of the
other topical ESRS, provide objectives, methodological guidance or other guidance that are to be
considered when preparing or disclosing sustainability statements according to ESRS. Those
paragraphs are not implemented as separate datapoints.
The following examples illustrate when paragraphs in ESRS are considered separate datapoints or
not:
(a) ESRS E1 paragraph 36: Not a datapoint because it describes the objective of the disclosure
requirement E1-5 on Energy Consumption.
(b) ESRS E1 paragraph AR 36: Not a data point because it provides calculation guidance on
the energy consumption.
(c) ESRS E1 paragraph AR 38, implemented as separate data point, due to the character of
the Application Requirement which defines how the reconciliation of net revenue from
activities in high climate impact sectors to the relevant financial statements line item or
disclosure may be presented.
(d) Application Requirements that are part of the narrative disclosure of their associated
Disclosure Requirements or datapoint are not designated as separate datapoints. An
example would be ESRS E1 paragraph 20 (a) and the related AR 9, detailing the
information to be provided under ESRS E1 paragraph 20 (a).
(e) Application Requirements marked with ‘shall consider’ have not been included as
separate datapoints, e.g., ESRS 2 paragraph AR 14 relating to ESRS 2 paragraph 42.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 147 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Appendix I: Table of ID release date
The date IDs were approved by the SRB is as follows:
February 2024
ID 33 – Definitions of non-employees
ID 36 – Energy mix
ID 39 – SBM-1 sector breakdown and phase-in
ID 43 - Scope 3 GHG emissions for insurance companies
ID 58 – Transitional provisions 750 employees
ID 81 – Subsidiaries, holding company – alignment for GHG protocol
ID 106 - Entity-specific guidance and examples
ID 109 – Bold text and Disclosure Requirement E1-6
ID 157 – ESRS 2 GOV disclosures and specifications in the topical ESRS
ID 162 - Minimum number of material matters
ID 167 - GHG Protocol Scope 3; Sector
ID 180 – Time horizon: impact versus financial materiality
March 2024
ID 31 – Breakdown of temporary, permanent, non-guaranteed hours employees
ID 37 – Positive impact only
ID 38 – Structure of the sustainability statement
ID 67 – Disclosure Requirement SBM-3 vocabulary / grammar used
ID 132 – Gender pay gap
ID 171 and ID 358 – Administrative, management and supervisory bodies
ID 204 – Phase-in for first-time large undertakings
ID 206 – Climate related targets
ID 214 – Resources to manage material impacts
ID 215 – Social dialogue global percentage
ID 217 – Prudential consolidation
ID 243 – Reference to financial statements
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 148 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
May 2024
ID 32 – Methodology for presenting information on employees
ID 41 – Financial institutions – scope of reporting boundary
ID 148 – Scope of consolidation for non-EU and unconsolidated subsidiaries
ID 172 – Materiality assessment – private equity structures
ID 185 – Objective evidence and stakeholders’ opinion
ID 186 – Substances of very high concern
ID 201 – Oil spill – Chemical spill
ID 208 – GHG emission calculation
ID 226 and 301– Substances of (very high) concern and hazard classes
ID 251 – Emission factors disclosure
ID 286 – Financial year different from calendar year
ID 291 – Phase-in 750 employees and topical standards
ID 293 – Relationship of strategy and policy
ID 296 – Location of ESRS 2 related Disclosure Requirement of topical standards
ID 306 – Location of MDR in the report during phase-in 750 employees
ID 326 – Implementation of data points
ID 335 – Applicability of EU datapoints – Appendix B
ID 337 – Metrics calculation – same level of precision
ID 340 – Entitlement family-related leave
ID 341 – Conditions for Paternity, Maternity, Parental Leave
ID 350 – Gross risk
ID 352 – Work-related ill health and fatalities from ill health
ID 356 – Sub-contractors Scope S1, S2
ID 365 – Significant employment
ID 376 – Definition of collective bargaining
ID 387 – Scope of ESRS S1-16
ID 395 – Net Revenue
ID 401 – Include quantitative information in qualitative information
ID 417 – Convictions
ID 419 – Legal proceedings currently outstanding for late payments
ID 426 – Structure of the sustainability statement
ID 440 – Pollutants emissions – disaggregation
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 149 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ID 441 – Microplastics
ID 442 – Entity-specific metrics
ID 444 – Payment practices
ID 461 – Sustainability statement – ESRS 1 Flowchart E and Disclosure of transition
plans and processes
ID 479 – Minimum Disclosure Requirements in ESRS G1
ID 482 – Breakdown of total revenue - financial institutions
ID 504 – Disclosure Requirements on material metrics when information is not
available
ID 510 – ESRS G1-5 – Political influence and lobbying activities
ID 517 – Disclosure of thresholds
ID 552 – Comparative information
ID 560 – Beneficiary of political contributions
ID 628 – Content Index
July 2024
ID 29 and ID 261 – ‘May’ and ‘shall’ reporting requirements
ID 245 – Climate-risk analysis
ID 268 – GHG emissions, annual update
ID 338 – Activities in high-climate impact sectors
ID 395 – Revenue/net revenue
ID 414 – Disaggregation of total emissions
ID 422 – Assets at risk, disclosure of monetary amount
ID 429 – Entity-specific and ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirements
ID 432 – Net zero target and GHG removals
ID 535 – Emission trading schemes
ID 536 – Carbon credit – Quality standard
ID 555 – Financial effects and climate risk
ID 577 – GHG removals – project definition
ID 636 – Definition of types of removals
ID 698 – Database for GHG emission factors
ID 718 – Disaggregation of GHG emissions
ID 728 – Representation of employees and other workers
ID 733 – Overlap of ESRS 2 and topical standards
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 150 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
ID 762 – Location of policies, actions and targets in the sustainability report
ID 781 – General Meeting
ID 802 - Reference lists of biodiversity-sensitive areas
ID 821 – Risk and opportunity for financial materiality
ID 863 – Metrics calculation – annual average
ID 906 – Structure of the sustainability statement – annex/appendix possible?
ID 910 – Transitional provisions for value chain and Scope 3 GHG
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 151 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Appendix II: Key word index
KEY WORDS ID reference
Accidents, work-related Question ID 352 - Work-related ill health and
fatalities from ill health
Actions and targets Question ID 762 – Location of policies, actions
and targets in the sustainability report
Administrative, management, and Question ID 171 & ID 358 - Administrative
supervisory bodies management and supervisory bodies
Alignment in methodology Question ID 81 - Subsidiaries and holding
company - alignment for GHG protocol
Annual average Question ID 863 – Metrics calculation –
annual average
Assets at risk Question ID 422 – Asset at risk, disclosure of
monetary amount
Base year Question ID 552 – Comparative information
Biodiversity-sensitive areas Question ID 802 - Reference lists of
biodiversity-sensitive areas
Bolded paragraph Question ID 109 - Bold text and ESRS E1
Disclosure Requirements E1-6
Breakdown of total revenue Question ID 482 – Breakdown of total revenue
– financial institutions
Carbon credit Question ID 536 – Carbon credit – Quality
standard
Chemical spills Question ID 201 – Oil spills – Chemical spills
Financial year different from Question ID 286 - Financial year different
calendar Year from calendar year
Categorisation of the general Question ID 781 – General Meeting
meeting
Climate risk Question ID 555 – Financial effects and
climate risk, Question ID 245 – Climate-risk
analysis
Collective bargaining agreement Question ID 376 - Definition of collective
bargaining
Comparative information Question ID 552 – Comparative information
Content index Question ID 628 – Content index, Question ID
906 – Structure of sustainability statement –
annex/appendix possible?
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 152 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Convictions Question ID 417 - Convictions
Cross-reference to financial Question ID 24 - Reference to financial
statements statements
Datapoints Question ID 326 – Implementation of
datapoints
Days lost Question ID 352 - Work-related ill health and
fatalities from ill health
Disclosure of thresholds Question ID 517 – Disclosure of thresholds
Disclosure of transition plans Question ID 461- Sustainability statement -
ESRS 1 flowchart E and disclosure of transition
plans
Emission trading schemes Question ID 535 – Emission trading schemes
Employees Question ID 33 - Breakdown of temporary,
permanent, and non-guaranteed hours
employees, Question ID 243 - Reference to
financial statements, Question ID 365 -
Significant employment, Question ID 387 -
Scope of ESRS S1-16
Employees, global percentage Question ID 215 - Social dialogue global
parentage
Employees permanent Question ID 31- Breakdown of temporary,
permanent, and non-guaranteed hours
employees
Employees temporary Question ID 31- Breakdown of temporary,
permanent, and non-guaranteed hours
employees
Energy consumption Question ID 36 - Energy mix
Entity-specific disclosures Question ID 106 - Entity-specific guidance
examples, Question ID 442 – Entity-specific
metrics, Question ID 429 – Entity-specific and
ESRS 2 Disclosure Requirements
ESRS 1 Appendix E Question ID 461- Sustainability statement -
ESRS 1 flowchart E and disclosure of transition
plans
ESRS 2 Appendix B (other EU Question ID 335 - Applicability of EU data
legislation) points - Appendix B
ESRS 2 related disclosures in topical Question ID 157 - ESRS 2 Disclosure
standards Requirement GOV, and specification in the
topical ESRS , Question ID 291 - Phase-in 750
employees and topical standards, Question ID
296 – Location of ESRS-2 related Disclosure
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 153 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Requirements in topical standards, Question
ID 733 – Overlap of ESRS 2 and topical
standards
ESRS E1 Disclosure Requirement E1- Question ID 109 - Bold text and ESRS E1
6 Disclosure Requirement E1-6
ESRS E5 Disclosure Requirement E5- Question ID 401- Include quantitative
5 information in qualitative information
ESRS S1 Disclosure Requirement S1- Question ID 24 - Reference to financial
6 statements
EU data-points Question ID 335 - Applicability of EU data
points - Appendix B, Question ID 906 –
Structure of sustainability statement –
annex/appendix possible?
Family-related leave Question ID 340 – Entitlement to family-
related leave
Fatalities Question ID 352 - Work-related ill health and
fatalities from ill health
Financial effects Question ID 555- Financial effects and climate
risk
Financial institutions Question ID 41 - Financial institutions - scope
of reporting boundary, Question ID 482 –
Breakdown of total revenue – financial
institutions
Financial investments Question ID 43 - Scope 3 GHG emissions for
insurance companies
Financial materiality Question ID 180 - Time horizon: impact versus
financial materiality, Question ID 821 – Risk
and opportunity for financial materiality,
Question ID 555- Financial effects and climate
risk
Financial year Question ID 286 - Financial year different
from calendar year
First-time large undertaking Question ID 204 - Phase-in for first-time large
undertakings
FTE Question ID 32 – Methodology for presenting
information on employees
Gender pay gap Question ID 132 - Gender pay gap, Question
ID 387 - Scope of ESRS S1-16
GHG emissions Question ID 698 – Database for GHG emission
factors
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 154 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
GHG emission, annual update Question ID 268 – GHG emissions, annual
update
GHG emission calculation Question ID 208 - GHG emission calculation
GHG emissions disaggregation Question ID 718 – Disaggregation of GHG
emissions
GHG emission factors Question ID 251- Emission factors disclosure
GHG emission factor database Question ID 698 – Database for GHG emission
factors
GHG emission reduction Question ID 206 - Climate-related targets
GHG protocol Question ID 81 - Subsidiaries and holding
company - alignment for GHG protocol
GHG removal Question ID 206 - Climate-related targets,
Question ID 432 – Net zero target and GHG
removals. Question ID 577 – GHG removals –
project definition
Gross risk Question ID 350 - Gross risk
Gross wage Question ID 132 - Gender pay gap
Holding companies Question ID 81 - Subsidiaries and holding
company - alignment for GHG protocol
Impact categories Question ID 698 – Database for GHG
emissionfactors
Impact materiality Question ID 180 - Time horizon: impact versus
financial materiality
Impact sectors ID 338 – Activities in high-climate impact
sectors
Information to employees Question ID 32 – Methodology for presenting
information on employees
Insurance companies Question ID 41 - Financial institutions - scope
of reporting boundary, Question ID 43 - Scope
3 GHG emissions for insurance companies
Investment activities Question ID 41 - Financial institutions - scope
of reporting boundary
IPCC Question ID 208 - GHG emission calculation
ISO Question ID 208 - GHG emission calculation
Late payments Question ID 419 - Legal proceedings currently
outstanding for late payments , Question ID
444 - Payment practices
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 155 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Leave – family related Question ID 341 - Conditions for paternity,
maternity, parental leave
Level of disclosure Question ID 560 – Beneficiary of political
contributions
Lobbying activities Question ID 510 - Political influence and
lobbying activities
Materiality Question ID 37 Positive impact only, Question
ID 43 - Scope 3 GHG emissions for insurance
companies, Question ID 185 - Objective
evidence and stakeholders’ opinion, Question
ID 337 – Metrics calculation – same level of
precision
Material metrics Question ID 504 – Disclosure Requirements
on material metrics when information is not
available
Matters not covered by ESRS 2 Question ID 442 – Entity-specific metrics
Disclosure Requirements
Metrics Question ID 286 - Financial year different
from calendar year, Question ID 401 - Include
quantitative information in qualitative
information, Question ID 863 – Metrics
calculation – annual average
Microplastics Question ID 441 - Microplastics
Minimum number of material Question ID 162 - Minimum number of
sustainability matters material matters
Minimum disclosure requirements Question ID 306 - Location of MDR in the
report during phase-in 750 employees,
Question ID 461 - Sustainability statement -
ESRS 1 flowchart E and disclosure of transition
plans, Question ID 479 - Minimum disclosure
requirements in ESRS G1
Net revenue Question ID 395 – Revenue/net revenue
Net turnover Question ID 395 – Revenue/net revenue
Net-zero targets Question ID 432 – Net zero target and GHG
removals
Non-consolidated subsidiaries Question ID 148 - Scope of consolidation for
non-EU and unconsolidated subsidiaries
Non-employees Question ID 33 - Definition of non-employees
Non-financial undertakings Question ID 335 - Applicability of EU data
points - Appendix B
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 156 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Non-graduated employees Question ID 31 - Breakdown of temporary,
permanent, and non-guaranteed hours
employees
Non-EU subsidiaries Question ID 148 - Scope of consolidation for
non-EU and unconsolidated subsidiaries
Nuclear sources Question ID 36 - Energy mix
Objective evidence Question ID 185 - Objective evidence and
stakeholders’ opinion
Oil spill Question ID 201 – Oil spills – Chemical spills
Own operations Question ID 41 - Financial institutions - scope
of reporting boundary
Payment practices Question ID 444 - Payment practices
Phase-in requirements Question ID 204 - Phase-in for first time large
undertakings
Phase-in less than 750 employees Question ID 58 - Transitional provisions 750
employees, Question ID 291 - Phase-in 750
employees and topical standards, Question ID
306 - Location of MDR in the report during
phase-in 750 employees
Physical risk Question ID 350 - Gross risk
Policies Question ID 293 - Relationship of strategy and
policy, Question ID 762 – Location of policies,
actions and targets in the sustainability report
Political contributions Question ID 510 - ESRS G1-5 Political influence
and lobbying activities, Question ID 560 –
Beneficiary of political contributions
Pollutant disaggregation Question ID 440 - Pollutants emissions -
disaggregation
Positive impact only material Question ID 37 - Positive impact only
Potential appendix Question ID 906 – Structure of sustainability
statement – annex/appendix possible?
Private equity Question ID 171 & ID 358 – Administrative,
management and supervisory bodies
Project definition Question ID 577 – GHG removals – project
definition
Prudential consolidation Question ID 217 - Prudential consolidation
Quality standards for carbon credits Question ID 536 – Carbon credit – Quality
standard
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 157 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Quantitative metrics Question ID 401 - Include quantitative
information in qualitative information
Relevance Question ID 43 - Scope 3 GHG emissions for
insurance companies
Removal, biogenic Question ID 636 – Definition of types of
removals
Removal and storage of land use Question ID 636 – Definition of types of
removals
Removal technological and storage Question ID 636 – Definition of types of
removals
Removal, hybrid and storage Question ID 636 – Definition of types of
removals
Reporting boundary Question ID 41 - Financial institutions - scope
of reporting boundary
Resource outflows Question ID 401 - Include quantitative
information in qualitative information
Representation of employees and Question ID 728 – Representation of
other workers employees and other workers
Resources to manage material Question ID 214 - Resources to manage
impacts material impacts
Revenue Question ID 395 – Revenue/net revenue
Salary - variable components Question ID 132 - Gender pay gap
Scope Question ID 268 – GHG emissions reporting,
Scope S1, S2 Question ID 356 – Sub-contractors Scope S1,
S2
Scope 3 GHG emissions Question ID 43 - Scope 3 GHG emissions for
insurance companies, Question ID 167 - GHG
protocol scope 3; sector, Question ID 910 –
Transitional provisions for value chain and
Scope 3 GHG
Sector breakdown Question ID 39 - SBM-1 sector breakdown and
phase-in
Significant employment Question ID 215 - Social dialogue global
percentage, Question ID 365 - Significant
employment, Question ID 387 - Scope of ESRS
S1-16
SoC Question ID 226 and 301– Substances of (very
high) concern and hazard classes
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 158 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Social dialogue Question ID 215 - Social dialogue global
percentage
Stakeholder opinion Question ID 185 - Objective evidence and
stakeholders’ opinion
Strategy Question ID 293 - Relationship of strategy and
policy
Structure of the sustainability Question ID 38 - Structure of the sustainability
statement statement, Question ID 426 – Structure of the
sustainability statement, Question ID 733 –
Overlap of ESRS 2 and topical standards
Question ID 762 – Location of policies, actions
and targets in the sustainability report,
Question ID 906 – Structure of sustainability
statement – annex/appendix possible?
Substances of concern Question ID 186 – Substances of very high
concern, Question ID 226 and 301–
Substances of (very high) concern and hazard
classes
Sustainability matters generating Question ID 821 – Risk and opportunity for
sustainability risks or opportunities financial materiality
SVCHs Question ID 186 – Substances of very high
concern, Question ID 226 and 301–
Substances of (very high) concern and hazard
classes
Time horizon Question ID 180 - Time horizon: impact versus
financial materiality
Total Emissions Question ID 414 – Disaggregation of total
emissions
Transition risk Question ID 350 - Gross risk
Transitional provisions Question ID 58 - Transitional provisions 750
employees, Question ID 204 - Phase-in for
first-time large undertakings, Question ID 291
- Phase-in 750 employees and topical
standards, Question ID 306 - Location of MDR
in the report during phase-in 750 employees,
Question ID 910 – Transitional provisions for
value chain and Scope 3 GHG
Value chain Question ID 167 - GHG protocol scope 3;
sector, Question ID 910 – Transitional
provisions for value chain and Scope 3 GHG
Voluntary disclosure requirements Question ID 29 and 261 – ‘May’ and ‘shall’
reporting requirements
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 159 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Workers in value chain Question ID 356 – Sub-contractors Scope S1,
S2
Working conditions Question ID 376 - Definition of collective
bargaining
Work-life balance Question ID 217 - Prudential consolidation,
Question ID 341 - Conditions for paternity,
maternity, parental leave
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 160 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Appendix III: Questions rejected as ‘already asked/answered’ and
reference to where they have been answered
Questions received and categorized as "already asked/answered" as of: 22.07.24
Reference to
Que Is Dtion Title Question asked ESRS reference Allocation to whe hr ae s q bu ee es nti on
answered
1G mr ao ts es r o iar l in te yt (impact) Shall preparers use an inherent (gross) or residual (net) perspective? E "IS mRS p a1 c c th Map at te er r i a3 l. i4 ty " x-cutting I AG s s1 e sM smat ee nr tia Fl Ait Qy 23
3M cha at ine r oia nl li yty in value Topic is not material for "own operations" but material for other segments, DR still due? E R aS neR dpS o v r1 at lic unh ega cup hnt ae d ir ne 5 rt. a1 k ing x-cutting I cG h a2 p V tea rlu 2e . 2Chain
79M a Ts ha s rst eee ssr hsi oa m ll di et sy n t - A d m ae pc ac t pteo rer or rmd piai rn in l
i
ag ain
t
nt ego d
t
w p t hoa h
r
er i dca seh hg t or i ema lr dp mp sh ?a i nc4 t e1 s , , w a r hp is ip k csr h o a sp n ur d sia t o at pe inp q aou bra it lu in tnt yi i t t ma iet asi tv a te er a e rsn i d ad e r/ eo n r t m iq fi au e ta d el i rat ia n at d l i f v a oe d r t d rh err e pe s os s rh e to d inl d b gs y p s t uh h ro e pu ould sn e db .e e Wr u t has ae ki td n igw s sah ese e n n as ESRS 1 paragprah 41 x-cutting I A c 3G h .s
7
s a1 e p sM ts ema r t e 3e n .r 6tia ali nt dy
102M C reoa pnt ose o rr tli i ia d nl a git ty e d/ H aso sw es t so m c eo nn td ou rc wt t ith he in m ea at ce hr i sa uli bt sy i da is as re ys s wm ite hn st u i bn s g er qo uu ep ns t w ai gt gh r m ega rn ay t is ou nb ?sidiaries: one consolidated materiality E M ( 1uS MpaR dtS ae a t1 r t ei eac
r
h l ibi ata a ly ip s
t
A et ye d s Asr oe
s
7 sns e. s 6 fm si; sn mI e aG n l
e
t I1 nG
t
)x-cutting I AG s s1 e sM smat ee nr tia Fl Ait Qy 13
ESRS 1 chapter 3.1
Materiality Stakeholders and their IG 1 Materiality
103assessment - Are there stakeholder groups that are mandatorily to be consulted? relevance …; IG 1 x-cutting Assessment
stakeholder groups Materiality Assessment chapter 5.4
chapter 5.4
117G mr ao ts es r o iar l in te yt (impact) Do we have to consider net or gross risk in the materiality assessment? materiality assessment x-cutting AIG ss e1 s M sma ete nr ti a FAlit Qy 23
122Value chain - tier N A a A e thb ns m e o vp o iu ta rn rt or u gt nw c mo o khf t ?e e ht n n Th e t he ri at i a s lm i s c e w a ta fi oft vl ee l uio t c lr w i dti ea s e as l (i d tt a e y . o t l goo na g cn cm o eia s 2 l a t my i -k cs ee ai ms c k a oi et i m sc ai sus p i lo t ln a , n E e na ) Sc ,ys Re b us Ss uo s s t iema s d ssr e u y ot e r ect u so o s c m n ti kd hs s aie e d ttn e eo ct r o r i ta if m ary t a l i p .a o n al n sl npsm yow a r ntot o e u t wr hldi e a h cl g a lu e o vp a eos r dt tlr sy oe . e ra T exm hc cie os a e rnc dd at ti ttv huhi et rei a e es ls lc ny. o tM r ip rey e es . uq p E lu rtx oe sa ds inmt ui o cvp tn al ie r oi i:s no u os f E R aS neR dpS o v r1 at lic unh ega cup hnt ae d ir ne 5 rt. a1 k ing x-cutting I c I a c FG Rh o AcO a t n Q2 op ss r iV 1t dl se ia n eirl nk ru 2 ee e t. dd h 1 ?C e t ;h S o Vh aa ao C nin lu dl b l d e
Voluntary / Will a "may"-disclosure be mandatory to disclose, if the datapoint is material? And vice-verse can a "shall"-
133Mandatory disclosure be omitted if the datapoint is not material? The question is; what relevance has "shall" and "may" ESRS 1 paragraph 18 x-cutting ID 29
requirements after materiality assessments was included by the European Commission?
134g dr ifo feu rp e a nc tt siv ee c ti on r s M t t ite h sa c e iht mse n a mr o mia l ao el ti gt etiy e o
r
ii s p as , i lr a c
,
e l wilp s w ho im ir i lt et h me rid n a
e
t po t eh on re
r
ia ta s t l oa c f nm oo lr yn e as
t
eo hnnl eoid t t mia htyt e ee . r
t
d H rt
i
eo cle c swv h oe e n nl v o f e tlo o hrr , g
e
aa y
t
.t ec o Co cp a hm i n ncp
o
yia s lo on d u gy e
y
st e c h wp oa e p ht d e
e
o rm op eue a it tr t a te isht r e i mi sas l t aa od tn p eud i re c io
a
t fw lo o
?
rn o t nm he ea t n te ey c c hd hni nf of oe lo lr oe g gn y y,t w wh hi ele re ESRS 1 paragraph 104 x-cutting I A 2G 2s s1 e sM smat ee nr tia Fli Aty Q
IG 1 Materiality
163universal thresholds?A finre a lt lh ise tr oe f u mni av te er rs ia al l t sh ur se tash ino ald bs il if to yr m im ap tta ec rt s ?and financial materiality? If not, how can we avoid changing the ESRS 1 x-cutting A chss ae ps ts em rse 3n .t 6 and
3.7
179( aI nm dp la ikc et l) i hm oa ot deriality Does likelihood apply on the residual risk (after mitigation) or on the raw/inherent risk (before mitigation)? E M FAS aR QtS e 2 1 r 3i ap la itr ya g Ar sa sep sh s m45 e; n I tG 1 x-cutting I AG s s1 e sM smat ee nr tia Fl Ait Qy 23
183r i o (m se p ul p pa ba ot -i )c ro /tt sn us us , n bh r ii t -i sp tik e o o s s p f a w i cn sitd h W E caSe R ra Sm c E tu e1s r t t i zoa e c G h t1 hie . e v T se eo sd w o mhu aab ttl te e e m x rsta e at n se t Ir Rcia a Ol ni st y w ? o en p m era ft ot re mrs m de atfi en re iad l ia ts y t ao sp seic ss s, m su eb n tt o op ni c ss u o b-r t s ou pb ic s au nb d t o wp ii tc hs rd ee sf uin lte sd d i in re t ch te ly E M chS aR at pS e t2 r ei a rIR l 2iO t .y 2- 1 A; s sIG es 1 sm ent x-cutting I A cG hs s a1 e p sM ts ema r t e 2e n .r 2tia pli at ry 44
materiality
184a d a ins u c ts ce ee o rs d r ns i dm l ai ig n te ie g on n ntt c o a a e l n pd r on co e ss W d Milh uiga ltet in n e c ax e ta i opc nt rl o ay c l d e Eo s nse t?s e A rit pr m e ri sce eoa smn w pt hh a ea n nt ie at sh s re se e m q ssua ii nrt gee dr di a otol uit bay l d ea o s mpse t a s t ts h em e ri e adn lu it te yo ?df ia lig n ee ng ca et i pv re o i cm esp sa oc ft tis h i en f Oo Er Cm De d G ub iy d t eh lie n ed su fe o r E M chS aR at pS e t1 r ei a rp la 4itr .y 3a g Ar sa sep sh s m45 e; n I tG 1 x-cutting I A c 4G h .s 3 s a1 e p sM ts ema r t e 3e n .r 5tia ali nt dy
instruments
mandatory / IG 1 Materiality
207v wo hlu en nt aa r my ad tis tc el ro s isu res C toa pn i cit ? be clarified which Datapoints are really mandatory if only a subtopic is material but not the entire E aS lmRS o s2 t A ap ll p De Rn 'd six E, S1 x-cutting A chss ae ps ts em r e 2n .2t (in
essassed material particular par 47)
212J s /V h v a aa r ln e ud eo a f c s his n ao f ioc ni ra mte as t i- o n W in h aa rt e s ph oa rr te in o gf uin nf do er rm taa kt ii no gn ' ss h ra el pl ob re t ir ne gp bo ort ue nd d f ar ro ym a njo di n ht o a wr r sa hn ag lle tm hie s n st hs a a ren d b ea s cs ao lc ci ua lt ae ts e w d?hen they are included E ES SR RS S 1 E, 1 p pa ar ra ag gr ra ap ph h 6 47 6; x-cutting I cG h a2 p V tea rlu 2e . 3chain
213J s /V h v a aa r ln e ud eo a f c s his n ao f ioc ni ra mte as t i- o n H aro rw an i gs em ma ete nr ti sa ali nty d t ao s sb oe c c iao tn es si d ine r ite sd r b ey p oa r r te inp go brt oin ug n du an rd ye ?rtaking when determining whether to include joint ESRS 1, section 5.1 x-cutting I cG h a2 p V tea rlu 2e . 3chain
261M i "n mfa o at re ym -r di aa atl ti it o ay n p o oaf in nd ts " 2 a u a. n bd1 d oaD e vto era te )p a ?s o k 2m i in n .4a t g Wt t de h hir a si ara t e t l i i s g it s y an t roa hdts e s tm e h res a es lt em de vire s ai can nlt l o c, s et if ua oi rk t e fe i E s op Sa fr R e a" Sc s " e 1h md :a 1e all 8n yd c idi fse i mc s o l co av los te e s er e" r E " id aS da lR ia ttS ya t ap1 tp ao:1 o kin8 eint? s t (2 p,e . i rx f2 e a tI cs m h e ea dp n d ele a nu 1 t cn a e d a p e ob or vo it n eva t rek ) i Ei s?n S mg 2 R .r Sa3e t 1Cq e :au r 1n ii 8ar e a ?l d n (e t xo a mdis pc lelo 2se ESRS 1 paragraph 18 x-cutting ID 29
Assessment of
severity (scale, scope, ÊSRS 1 paragraph 45; IG 1 IG 1 Materiality
275irremediable How can the severity of an impact be assessed, specifically for environmental matters ? Materiality Assessment x-cutting assessment
character) for chapter 3.6 chapter 3.3.1
impacts
281M p cooa nint se t id r in eia rtl i i vt m ay le- u a etot c w hah ia nt W oph ee rn a td ioo nin sg b t eh ce o m nsa idte er ri ea dli t fy ir sa ts s se ubss sm eqe un et n s th lyo u vl ad l uv ea l cu he a c inh a bi en ib ne te c go rn as ti ed de ?red from the outset or should own E m 4S 2aR .tS e 1 ri a3 l. i3 ty D , po au rb al ge raph x-cutting I a c 3G hs .2s a1 e ;p : s tsM em ra e 2t ne .6tr i aa nlit dy
Difference between
287w aco cr ik d- er ne tla at ne dd work- What is the difference between an 'accident' and an 'injury', and how should I count a 'case'? ESRS S1-14 paragraph 88cSocial ID 271
related injury
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 161 of 166ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 162 of 166
Q
Q u e stio n s re ce iv e d a n d ca te g o rize d a s "a lre a d y a sk e d /a n sw e re d " a s o f: 2 2 .0 7 .2 4
Reference to
uestion w here question Title Q uestion asked ESRS reference Allocation to ID has been
answ ered
Disclosure Requirem ent
IRO-1 and SBM -3; ESRS 2
paragraph 49; ESRS E1
paragraph 12; ESRS E2
paragraph 10; ESRS E2 "alongside" paragraph 7; ESRS E4 presentation of ESRS If w e take the exam ple of ESRS E1, and the inform ation relating to the transition plan (E1-1, §14), should it 304 paragraph 9; ESRS E5 x-cutting ID 2962 related inform ation be published in ESRS E1 or in the part linked to E1 in ESRS 2 ? paragraph 10; ESRS S1 of topical standards paragraph 11; ESRS S1
paragraph 8; ESRS S3
paragraph 6; ESRS S4
paragraph 7; ESRS G1
paragraph 4
Disclosure Requirem ent
IRO-1 and SBM -3; ESRS 2
paragraph 49; ESRS E1
paragraph 12; ESRS E2
paragraph 10; ESRS E2 "alongside" paragraph 7; ESRS E4 presentation of ESRS If w e take the exam ple of ESRS S1, and the inform ation requested in Appendix C of ESRS 2, should w e publish 305 paragraph 9; ESRS E5 x-cutting ID 304 and 2962 related inform ation the parts related to SBM -2 and SBM -3 in ESRS 2 or in the topical ESRS? paragraph 10; ESRS S1 of topical standards paragraph 11; ESRS S1
paragraph 8; ESRS S3
paragraph 6; ESRS S4
paragraph 7; ESRS G1
paragraph 4m
oving from im pact W e are an Group of Com panys in three different sectors ( logistics, retail, services). W e did an sim ple IG 1 M ateriality IG 1 M ateriality (or financial) m aterialityanalysis last year and published it in our sustainability paper. How can w e do a double m ateriality Assessm ent 315 Assessm ent chapter 4.1 x-cuttingm ateriality alone to and w hat are the exact steps to do it. Can w e use the data from the sim plle m ateriality to perform the chapter 4.1 for GRI for GRI 4.2 for ISSBdouble m ateriality double m ateriality or do w e have to collect com pletely new data? 4.2 for ISSBESRS
1, IG 1 M ateriality How should w e define our m aterial topics? Should be the highest value of the IROs scored or the average of IG 1 M ateriality 325 0 Assessm ent 3.6 and 3.7 x-cuttingthem ? Assessm entSetting thresholdsXBRL
- com plete list Considering Appendix C of ESRS 2 and EFRAG´s list of ESRS data points excel; W hy not all DRs in ESRS E1-9 are ESRS Disclosure ESRS 1, Appendix C 329 XBRLof requirem ents m arked as subject to phasing-in provisions (Colum n I)? Requirem ent E1-9 on E1-9IG
1 M ateriality M ateriality - M y question refers to the im plem entation of the m ateriality assessm ent. Does a high rating for one of the ESRS 1 General Assessm ent 3.6 354 thresholds for im pact x-cuttingfour factors (scale, im pact, irrem ediability, likelihood) m ean that an im pact m ust be classified as m aterial? requirem ents, AR9+10 and 3.7 Setting m ateriality thresholdsPage
(docum ent 237-PDF
238); Num eral 5: W hen
disclosing inform ation
Adm inistrative, Could you please specify clearly about w hat w ill be included in the adm inistrative, m anagem ent and about the role of the
358 m anagem ent and supervisory bodies? By this, I m ean, it refers to only a highest body (Board of Directors) or it refers to adm inistrative, x-cutting ID 171supervisory
bodies another(s) bodies. m anagem ent and
supervisory bodies, the
undertaking shall cover
the follow ing aspects".applicability
of
Appendix B (other EU DM AIG Paragraph 5, ESRS 361 legislation) Explicit statem ent on ESRS 2 Appendix B Datapoints even if they are not relevant to m y com pany? x-cutting ID 3352 Appendix Bdatapoints for all
undertakingsPrecedence
of How should one give precedence of severity over likelihood in the case of a potential negative hum an rights IG 1 M aterialy ESRS 1 Characteristics of 368 severity over im pact if severity and likelihood are m ultiplied as done in risk m anagem ent to determ ine the im pact's x-cutting Assessm ent severity AR 11likelihood in the M A m ateriality? chapter 3.6.2high
clim ate im pact ESRS E1 paragraph 40 and 369 Is paragraph 40 only applicable for undertakings listed in NACE Sections A-H or L? Environm ent ID 338sectors AR 36Actual
and Potential ESRS 1 Chapter 6.4, M AIG ESRS Annex II -
372 Im pacts and tim e W hat is the exact relation betw een Actual and Potential Im pacts, and the short-, m edium - and long-term ? paragraph 74 and chapter x-cutting Acronym s and
horizons 3.6 glossary of term sW
hen disclosing inform ation under ESRS S1-6. Do w e account for all em ployees? Or only significant Total num ber of 386 em ploym ent (head count of locations w here w e have a m inim um of 50 em ployees that represent at least ESRS S1 paragraph 50(a) Social ID 365em ployees 10% of total em ploym ent)?Com
ponents annual the com putation of the annual total rem uneration considers not only base salary but also takes into account
390 total rem uneration, other cash com ponents and benefits. W Hy are these com ponents not included w hen com puting the gender ESRS S1-16 Social ID 132gender
pay gap pay gap?Sub-consultants
396 Are sub-consultants included in ow n w orkforce, or are they to be included w ithin the S2-disclosures? S1-7 Social ID 356Scope S1, S2Substances
of (very W ould there be available of the list of actual SOC w ith their CAS num bers? W hat w ill be the concentration Disclosure Requirem ent 398 Environm ent ID 186, 301high) concern lim it of those substances in the m ixture? E2-535(a)v.
Consum ption from nuclear products: Does this also im ply purchased electrcitiy from the grid that has Energy consum ption 469 been generated via nuclear production or only % of nuclear products directly purchased by the reporting ESRS E1 paragraph 35 Environm ent ID 36from nuclear sources com pany?Specification
of W e do not understand w hat w e are suppose to answ er here, w hich ESRS DR are w e supposed to specify ESRS 2 ´, SBM -3, 470 im pacts, risks and im pacts, risks and opportuninties for in this datapoint and w hat does the standard m ean w ith "opposed to x-cutting ID67paragraph 48hopportunities those covered by additional entity-specific disclosure"? W hat entity-specific disclosure?M
andatory
disclosure Is it correct that apart from all disclosures in ESRS 2, no other disclosures, requirem ents or data points are 476 ESRS 1 Appendix E x-cutting ID 29requirem ents outside obligatory and everything can be om itted if found to be not m aterial even if a topic is m aterial?ESRS
2
i am trying to understand w hether m y subsidiaries located outsite of Europe are eligible to the CSRD. The scope of parent com pany is headquartered in Germ any and satisfies all 3 criterias, and subsidiaries are located in 480 consolidation - non- ESRS 1 paragraph 62 x-cutting ID 148Hong-kong, China and South Korea. Do w e need to collect their inform ation and consolidate them or they EU subsidiaries are out of scope ?ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 163 of 166
Q
Q u e stio n s re ce iv e d a n d ca te g o rize d a s "a lre a d y a sk e d /a n sw e re d " a s o f: 2 2 .0 7 .2 4
Reference to
uestion w here question Title Q uestion asked ESRS reference Allocation to ID has been
answ ered
IG 1 M ateriality M andatory Assessm ent disclosure paragraph 4; ESRS requirem ents; Are all general requirem ents as specified in ESRS2 obligatory disclosure (see ESRS 1.29) or only IRO-1 ESRS 1.29 (in conjuction 1 paragraph 29; 495 disclosure requirem ents (see ESRS 2.2). Do IRO-2 and SM B-3 also set disclosure requirem ents for the m ateriality w ith ESRS 1.30 and ESRS x-cutting ESRS 2 paragraph 2 requirem ents of assessm ent? 2.2) (a) "in all m ateriality instances" and (b) assessm ent "only … if"
M ateriality
assessm ent of IG1 M ateriality Does a com pancy w ithin its m aterality assessm ent process have to evaluate each sub topics individually in 498 sustainability ESRS 1-27 x-cutting Assessm ent the list provided in AR 16 as m ust?m atters / chapter 2.2approaches
& AR16M
ateriality Does the m ateriality assessm ent take into account com pany-specific policies and m easures in determ ining IG 1 M ateriality 503 assessm ent; entity- ESRS 1 x-cuttingw hether an issue is m aterial? Assessm entspecific policiesScope
of Shall an EU entity (i.E. EU-based listed holding com pany) that falls under the scope of the CSRD reporting
506 consolidation - non- obligation, and w hich has a non-EU subsidiary (a credit institution), include in its consolidated report ESRS ESRS 1 7.6 x-cutting ID 148EU
subsidiary data points/KPIs of that Non-EU subsidiary (credit institution)?The
CSRD m akes a distinction betw een 'ow n operations' and those perform ed in the 'upstream and
dow nstream value chain'. W hat determ ines how ever w hether an activity should be considered as an 'ow n ow n operations; 513 activity' or not? The question is specifically around subcontracting. A subcontracter is a supplier. W hen All ESRS x-cutting ID 496subcontractors
com pany A subcontracts a piece of w ork to com pany B. Should the activities perform ed by com pany B then
also be considered as 'ow n operations' by com pany A?
IG 1 M ateriality
Assessm ent FAQ
inherent or residual ESRS 1 paragraph 26; 23;
515 risks; before or after W hen scoring im pacts, should w e consider residual risk or inherent risk? M aterial m atters and x-cuttingm
itigation activities m ateriality of inform ation see also ID 790 on
financial
m ateriality; ID 791
Given: a EU daughter com pany that m eets the reporting requirem ents that belongs to a larger EU group M ateriality IG 1 M ateriality w hich consolidates reporting on group level. Question: is the daughter com pany obliged to run their ow n 539 Assessm ent - level of ESRS 1 3.7 x-cutting Assessm ent specific DM A analysis? Or, can the DM A (and final reporting) be organised on group level in w hich the disaggregation chapter 3.6.3daughter is integrated?M
AIG - assessm ent Regarding the m ateriality assessm ent. Is it m andatory for a com pany to assess the level of m ateriality of the ESRS 1 General IG 1 M ateriality of m ateriality at the 544 IROs of each m aterial topic, or can a com pany assess the level of m ateriality directly of the m aterial topic requirem ents; ch 1.1; x-cutting Assessm ent level of M atter itself? parag. 2 chapter 2.2rather than IRO
M AIG - IRO ESRS 1 General IG 1 M ateriality assessm ent of Can the topics (or IROs) be assessed for their significance or is it m andatory to assess the com ponents of Requirem ents; ch 3.4 and 545 x-cutting assessm ent severity & likelihood severity and likelihood (im pact m ateriality) and potential m agnitude and likelihood (financial m ateriality)? 3.5 (Im pact m ateriality chapter 3.3m andatory? and financial m ateriality)
Calculation of gender
pay gap - Does this rule require to report one consolidated figure as the global gender pay gap or can this requirem ent ESRS S1-16, paragraph 97, 546 consolidation, also be fulfilled by reporting the gender pay gap only for each country, w here the undertaking has Social ID 388(a), (a)disaggregation by em ployees?countryM
AIG - Def of W hen ESRS docum ent m entions 'sustainability m atters', does it m ean topics, sub-topics or sub sub topics IG 1 M ateriality sustainability ESRS S1 - M ateriality 566 (e.g., ow n w orkforce/ W orking conditions/ Secure em ploym ent)? W hich level of topics (level 1, 2 or 3) should x-cutting Assessm ent section m atters (and links to assessm entbe considered to conduct the m ateriality assessm ent? 2.2topics or sub-topics)M
ateriality
assessm ent - order of IG 1 M ateriality For enterprises w orking on their financial stakeholder m ateriality, w ouldn't it be m ore intuitive to assess in Cross-cutting standards 571 addressing im pacts, x-cutting Assessm ent order; business objectives, opportunities, risks and im pacts, respectively ? and governance issuesrisk and chapter 2.1opportunities
IG 1 M ateriality
Double m ateriality For the DM A, does priorities are only on m atters that have both im pact m ateriality and a financial Assessm ent 586 ESRS x-cuttingassessm ent m ateriality, or can it be a priority if only one m ateriality ? paragraphs 36 to
38ow
n operations; As a construction com pany (general contractor) in w hich scope do I have to disclose w aste? Do I have to 591 ESRS E5-5 paragraph 37 x-cutting ID 496w aste generated disclose the w aste of the subcontractors that w ork for m y project?ow
n operations; As a construction com pany (general contractor) in w hich scope do I have to disclose w aste? Do I have to 593 ESRS E5-5 paragraph 37 Environm ent ID 496 (and 591)w aste generated disclose the w aste of the subcontractors that w ork for m y project?ow
n operation; W hen perform ing a dem olition of a building for a client, the reporting undertaking is "w aste producer" by 595 w aste - dem olition of ESRS E5-5 paragraph 37 Environm ent ID 496law . Do these w aste am ounts have to be reportet even though the are not generated in ow n operations?buildingsM
ateriality IG 1 M ateriality W hat kind of scales can an undertaking use for evaluating scale and scope of an (potential) im pact, and how 613 assessm ent - scale ESRS 1 paragraph 45 x-cutting Assessm ent w ould an undertaking evaluate its im pacts?and scope chapter 3.6Fossil
fuel sector, Should an Engineering, Procurem ent and Construction contractor of an LNG plant include its EPC revenues 645 ESRS 2 paragraph 40 d (i) x-cutting ID 644scope under this caption?ow
n operations; Does the disclosure requirem ent and the datapoints apply to trading com panies w hich do not m anufacture 650 E5-4 Environm ent ID 496resource inflow s; goods but only resell them ?M
DR on policies, also The paragraph containing the reference to M DR-P is m issing for G1-1 w herefore it is not clear if com panies 657 ESRS G1-1 §7-§10 Governance ID 479for ESRS G1 have to disclose the M DR-P requirem ents for G1 or not.Policies
on m aterial 658 Concerning G1-1: Does the com pany have to prepare policies for all m aterial topics? ESRS G1-1 §7 Governance ID 479Governance topicsESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 164 of 166
Q
Q u e stio n s re ce iv e d a n d ca te g o rize d a s "a lre a d y a sk e d /a n sw e re d " a s o f: 2 2 .0 7 .2 4
Reference to
uestion w here question Title Q uestion asked ESRS reference Allocation to ID has been
answ ered
Governance;
m inim um disclosure ESRS 2 M DR-A § 66 ESRS 659 requirem ents for Is it m andatory to disclose actions and targets for G1? Governance ID 4792 M DR-T § 80policies, actions and
targetsAcquisitions
during W hen reporting m etrics - is ESRS1 para 62 ("The sustainability statem ent shall be for the sam e reporting
677 financial year / close undertaking as the financial statem ents") alw ays applicable? Are there any exem ptions or transitional ESRS1 paragraph 62 x-cutting ID 504to
year-end provisions applicable?For
each "basis of preparation" described in the standard ESRS 2, should all the disclosures concerned by the 683 0 ESRS 2 BP-2 x-cutting ESRS 2 paragraph 8standard be listed in the ESRS 2 paragraph at the beginning of the report?scope
of W hich countries are to be included in the reporting? If the holding com pany is based in Germ any, are all consolidation - non 684 subsidiaries w orldw ide to be included or only those based in Europe? Should subsidiaries in the UK be ESRS S1 x-cutting ID 148EU - unconsolidated included?subsidiaries
W hy are not all datapoints as w ell as application requirem ents included in the excel draft list of esrs data XBRL - com plete list 697 points? Som e points are m issing ( ESRS 1 E1-1 DP15) ? Also, m any application requirem ents are not included ESRS 1 E1-1 DP15 XBRL ID 326of requirem ents in the list. W hy is this the case?W
e understand that the exercise of assessm ent of the m ateriality of a topic results in determ ining a level of
risk and a level of opportunity for the financial m ateriality on one side, and a level of negative im pact and a
Risk vs opportunity level of positive im pact for the im pact m ateriality on the other side. How ever, w e are w ondering how to IG 1 M ateriality
/ properly give a sense of risk vs opportunity and positive vs negative im pact? Assessm ent 706 ESRS 1 Chapter 2.2 x-cuttingpositive vs negative Question rephrased to: W here to set thresholds for risks and opportunities respectively positive and negative chapter 3.6 and
im pact, thresholds im pacts? For instance, if a topic has a high level of opportunity, and a low level of risk, w here should w e place 3.7it
on our m atrix for the reader to be able to know w hether the level of financial m ateriality is driven by the
risk or by the opportunity of this specific topic?
For an unconsolidated subsidiary (investm ent entity) outside the reporting com pany's value chain and
control, how should its Scope 3 em issions be accounted for: Proportion: 100% of total em issions or based on ESRS E1-6; ESRS 1: section 708 Scope 3, VC Environm ent ID 78, 804the reporting com pany's equity share? Reporting: Lum ped together under category 3.15 or disaggregated 5.1into
specific Scope 3 categories based on em ission sources?Regarding
the GHG em issions of entities w here the reporting com pany has joint operational control w ith
another entity: W hat portion of their em issions should be accounted for in Scope 3 em issions by the ESRS E1-6; ESRS E1 Paras 709 Scope 3, VC reporting com pany? 100% of their total GHG em issions, regardless of the extent of operational control by Environm ent ID 7846, AR40the reporting com pany; or a proportional share based on the extent of operational control by the reporting
com pany?Are
datapoints from ESRS 2, Appendix B (List of datapoints in cross-cutting and topical standards that derive
Datapoints derived from other EU legislation) alw ays m andatory and if not, how can this be com patible w ith the CSRD IG 1 M ateriality
717 from EU legislation (2022/2644, Article 1 - Am endm ents to Directive 2013/34/EU, paragraph 8, no. 1, subparagraph 2: "w hich ESRS 1 paragraph 35 x-cutting Assessm ent
and m ateriality shall at least include the inform ation that financial m arket participants subject to the disclosure obligations chapter 2.5of
Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 need in order to com ply w ith those obligations")?
ESRS 1 paragraph ESRS 1 General Alw ays m aterial If a topic is m andatory to report on (such as E1 clim ate change), can the m ateriality assessm ent for the IROs 32; IG1 M ateriality 721 Requirem ents paragraph x-cuttingtopics? belonging to this topic be om itted and the IROs w ill becom e m aterial autom atically? Assessm ent 25, 27, 42, 45, 46 paragraph 31
ESRS S1.93, ESRS S1.94, Conditions Fam ily- W hich conditions m ust be m et to affirm 'entitlem ent to fam ily-related leave' w hen reporting in accordance 726 ESRS S1.AR96, ESRS Social ID 340related Leave w ith ESRS S1-15? S1.AR97W
hat is the correct approach to stakeholder engagem ent?Detailed
questions provided in background:1)
W hen is the right tim e to engage stakeholders into the dialogue? Is it correct approach to engage
stakeholders only in the last step of Double M ateriality Assessm ent, for validation of identified m aterial
topics, sub-topics etc.? 2) W ould it be correct to engage them in the form of questionnaire w ith a scale to IG 1 M ateriality score m ateriality of each topic? Is it sufficient to explain the reason w hy this topic w as deem ed m aterial and stakeholder Assessm ent 729 not to include the exhausting list of IROs? 3) Should stakeholders consider w hat is m aterial to them or ESRS E1, paragraph 3.1 x-cuttingengagem ent chapter 3.5, FAQ 1 consider w hat is m aterial to the reporting entity in their view ? 4) Is it correct to assign different w eights to and chapter 5.4different stakeholder types w hen evaluating the results of stakeholder dialogue? Could these w eights be
decided solely by internal m anagerial decision of the reporting entity? 5) Is it correct approach to choose a
sam ple of people from each stakeholder category a engage them in the dialogue? E.g. if the reporting entity
has 1,000 em ployees, it w ill choose a sam ple of em ployees from each functional departm ent and engage
only 20 em ployees.
ESRS 1 paragraph
I w onder w hy the ESRS 1 group policies and actions (§12 c ii) together, separated from m etrics and targets 33 and 24; IG 1 Relationship of (§12 d), w hile the "Flow chart for determ ining disclosures under ESRS" in Appendix E is referring to policies, ESRS 1, § 12c ii and 12d M ateriality 737 policies, actions, and x-cuttingactions and targets as one "group", w hile m etrics is considered alone? Are targets related to both these and Appendix E Assessm ent targets to m etrics "groups"? paragraph 55 and
56ESRS
E1 DR E1-5 740 High Clim ate sectors W hat are the "high clim ate im pact sectors" referred to in ESRS E1 DR E1-5 paragraph 38? Environm ent ID 338paragraph 38
IG1 M ateriality
Reporting only part Assessm ent 757 W ould it be possible to report only part of the m etrics of a m aterial ESRS ? ESRS 1 part 3.2 x-cuttingof m etrics chapter 2.4 para
56non-listed
com panies CSRD and ESRS 1
786 and m anagem ent Do private com panies still publish the sustainability statem ent separately to the financial statem ents? N/A Other chapter 8 (para
report 110)IG
2 Value Chain
FAQ 1 and also FAQ ESRS 1 General 7788 Value chain - tier N How far from the com pany should w e go w hen analysing affected stakeholders from the DM A perspective? requirem ents 3./3.1./ 22. x-cutting(a)
sim ilar question ID
122Financial
year Disclosure Requirem ent E-PRTR requires reporting on calendar year basis. If a com pany has a different fiscal year (e.g. 1.10-30.9.) 805 different vs calendar E2-4 paragraphs 28 & AR Environm ent ID 286can the E-PRTR data still be disclosed on calendar year basis?year - m etrics 24ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 165 of 166
Q
Q u e stio n s re ce iv e d a n d ca te g o rize d a s "a lre a d y a sk e d /a n sw e re d " a s o f: 2 2 .0 7 .2 4
Reference to
uestion w here question Title Q uestion asked ESRS reference Allocation to ID has been
answ ered
qualitative vs
quantitative Regarding financial effects in m onetary term s, is it only m andatory to report that in the E and not the S and 810 disclosures for DR ESRS S1 AR9 x-cutting ID 141G?SBM
3 financial
effects
IG 1 M ateriality ESRS 2 par.53;ESRS 2 IRO prioritising for Assessm ent 813 Can/should IROs be prioritised for reporting purposes? par.53 (b) iv; ESRS 2 x-cuttingreporting purposes chapter 2 par.53(c) iii; IG 1 par. 26 (paragraph 26)Phase-in
750 Can M inim um Disclosure Requirem ents (and the related data points) be subject to phase-in provisions for em ployees; ESRS 2 820 the sustainability m atters that have been assessed as m aterial according to the undertaking's m ateriality ESRS 1 Appendix C x-cutting ID 58related disclosures in assessm ent?topical standards
M apping
sustainability W ill official EFRAG m apping tables (in Excel or another form at) be provided to link the data points to the ID 177, 846, 859 828 ESRS 1 para AR 16. x-cuttingm atters to disclosure respective topics and sub-topics? [Draft IG 4]requirem
ents
W hen perform ing the DM A for a holding com pany, should a topic, considered only m aterial for subsidiary A
holding and topic be considered m aterial at the holding level? At the end, should it be reported for all the other subsidiaries? IG 1 M ateriality 830 only m aterial for Or due to w eighting reasons it could be disregarded (if subsidiary A does not represent m uch neither in ESRS 1 paras 67,68,69,70 x-cutting Assessm ent FAQ 22subsidary term s of im pact nor financially)? Also, should w e consider holding-level specific topics (e.g. holding com pany
em ployee m atters)??W
hat does "annual % target/base year" concretely m ean in the table to disclose GHG em issions and the 834 Reduction target ESRS-E1 AR 48 Environm ent ID 414com pany's related targets disaggregated by Scope 1, and 2 and significant Scope 3?W
hy are not all paragraphs of the ESRS E1 full text that indicate a disclosure requirem ent by 'the
undertaking shall...' included in the 'Draft EFRAG IG 3 List of ESRS Data Points 231222.xlsx'? If a com pany XBRL - com plete list 838 checks all relevant (i.e. m aterial and applicable) row s in the list of ESRS data points, can it be sure that it is ESRS E1 AR 46 and AR 51 XBRL ID 326 and 697of requirem ents com pliant w ith the respective ESRS or still need to check the w hole full text incl. ARs if som ething needs to
be disclosed in addition?
M apping ESRS2-IRO-2-§56 requires the com pany to publish the list of DRs derived from its m ateriality analysis, which
sustainability w ill greatly help the auditor's w ork. How ever, the list of topics to be analysed first (ESRS 1 - AR16) does not ESRS2 - IRO-2 - 56; ESRS2 - ID 177, 828, 859 846 x-cuttingm atters to disclosure exactly follow the list of DRs in each standard. Furtherm ore, w hat should be done w hen a com pany has not AR19 [Draft IG 4]requirem
ents used the AR16 list but a list of specific issues, which it has then translated into transversal ESRSs?
ESRS paragraph 17 The explanatory note of the data points says that 134 of the 141 data points in ESRS 2 (excluding the 12 dp IG 3 List of ESRS 850 datapoints (phase-in that are voluntary) have to be reported irrespective of the m ateriality assessm ent. So w hich are the 7 dp ESRS data points x-cutting Data Points< 750 em ployees) that are excluded?
M apping
sustainability If I've identified tw o sub-topics related to clim ate change (i.e. clim ate change m itigation and energy) as ID 177, 828, 846 859 ESRS 1 x-cuttingm atters to disclosure m aterial w hich are the datapoints that I m ust disclose? [Draft IG 4]requirem
ents
Sectors disclosing on If the ESRS E1-5 paragraph 38 is only to be disclosed by com panies w ithin NACE group A-H or L, w hy is the 864 the DR on the ESRS E1-5 paragraph 38 Environm ent ID 367corresponding AR 33 then including operations not in high clim ate im pact sectors?com position of w aste
M apping
sustainability Doubt on how to determ ine w hich DRs have to be applied w hen any topic, subtopic or sub-sub-topic had 880 ERSR 1 AR 16 x-cutting ID 177m atters to disclosure been assesed as a sustainbility m atters by a m ateriality assesm entrequirem
ents
Disclosure ESRS 1 paragraph 33 discusses w hat needs to be disclosed if com panies do not have policies, actions, and/or requirem ents on targets. W hat do com panies need to do if they do not have inform ation available on m aterial ESRS m etrics, 887 m aterial m etrics ESRS 1 paragraph 33 x-cutting ID 504on disclosure requirem ents related to strategy (e.g. ESRS E4-1), and on disclosure requirem ents related to w hen inform ation is im pacts, risks and opportunities m anagem ent (e.g. ESRS S1-2 and S1-3)?not availabledata
not How acceptable w ould be a reporting practice to include statem ents like "w e do not calculate/do not obtain
calculated/available - the inform ation" for certain disclosures. This does not concern specific cases on not-m aterial subtopics or E5-5 paragraph 36 or 888 x-cutting ID 504w hat to report, disclosures w hich explicitly require com pany to say "w e dot have it" and "w hen w e w ill have it" (like for paragraph 37cenforceability
exam ple, E1-1 Art17 on clim ate transition plan).Question
is around applying ESRS 2 in the topical standards ESG. ESRS 2 is describing the disclosure ESRS 2 related requirem ents of the reporting areas GOV, SBM and IRO. These reporting areas are again to be reported in Disclosure ESRS 2 - GOV1-5, SBM 1-3, 920 the topical specific standards. The question is w hether it is required to report the "general", overall x-cutting ID 296Requirem ents in IRO1-2com pany related reporting areas in ESRS 2 OR apply the disclosure requirem ents defined in ESRS 2 w hen topical standards reporting the specific disclosure requirem ents in the topical standards.926
Form ula W hat is the form ula to estim ate last colum n of the AR48 table regarding Annual % Target / base year? ESRS E1-6 AR48 Environm ent ID 414Definition
of reuse 942 W hat is the m eaning of reuse? Not a w aste based on Glossary. ESRS E5 para 37b(i) Environm ent ESRS Glossary(circular econom y)ESRS Implementation Q&A Platform – Compilation of Explanations January – May 2024
EFRAG is funded by the European Union through the Single Market
Programme in which the EEA-EFTA countries (Norway, Iceland and
Liechtenstein), as well as Kosovo participate. Any views and opinions
expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not
necessarily reflect those of the European Union, the European
Commission or of countries that participate in the Single Market
Programme. Neither the European Union, the European Commission
nor countries participating in the Single market Programme can be held
responsible for them.
© 2024 EFRAG All rights reserved. Reproduction and use rights are strictly
limited. For further details please contact efragsecretariat@efrag.org.
Compilation of Explanations January—July 2024 Page 166 of 166